===== PDF PAGE 001 =====

The Living Brain




A Pelican Book


===== PDF PAGE 002 =====

                                Desnutnd Tripp


William Grey Walter was born in 1910 at Kansas City. His
father was English and at seven he came here to school. He
was a promising classicist at Westminster School, but what
had started as a hobby at home developed into a strong bent
for scientific subjects. At Cambridge he read Natural
Sciences and, after taking a First, did four years of post­
graduate research in nerve physiology and conditioned re­
flexes. His career since then, most notably as Head of the
Burden Neurological Institute at Bristol, has been a succes­
sion of remarkable discoveries - ‘delta’ rhythms, new facts
about epilepsy, ‘alpha’ rhythms, and ‘theta’ waves. The
‘electro-mechanical animals’ which he devised over ten years
ago attracted much interest and he has conducted demon­
strations on TV.
   Dr Grey Walter speaks French, German, and Italian, has
travelled widely and published many learned papers. He is
D.Sc.(Cambridge) and has been honoured by foreign uni­
versities. His only novel. Further Outlook, deals in fiction form
with the next hundred years. He is a qualified glider pilot
and interested in model-making and underwater exploration.
       Cover design by Ian Bradbery, using a photograph
                  from the Mansell Collection

             For a complete list of books available
                please write to Penguin Books
              whose address can be found on the
                     back of the title page


===== PDF PAGE 003 =====

   PELICAN BOOKS
   A526
THE LIVING BRAIN
   W. GREY WALTER


===== PDF PAGE 004 =====

W. GREY WALTER




         THE LIVING
              BRAIN

        \ ...an enchanted loom where millions
        of flashing shuttles weave a dissolving
        pattern, always a meaningful pattern
        though never an abiding one ..
               SIR CHARLES SHERRINGTON




PENGUIN BOOKS


===== PDF PAGE 005 =====

         Penguin Books Ltd, Harmondsworth, Middlesex
AUSTRALIA: Penguin Books Pty Ltd, 762 Whitehorse Road,
                                     Mitcham, Victoria


                       First published by Duckworth 1953
                         Published in Penguin Books 1961


                       Copyright© W. Grey Walter, 1961


                        Made and printed in Great Britain
                          by Hazcll Watson & Viney Ltd
                                   Aylesbury and Slough




                 This book is sold subject to the condition
                 that it shall not, by way of trade, be lent,
                  re-sold, hired out, or otherwise disposed
                         of without the publisher's consent,
                            in any form of binding or cover
                                    other than that in which
                                              it is published


===== PDF PAGE 006 =====

TO MY FATHER
with whom this book
happily written


===== PDF PAGE 007 =====

Contents
    PREFACE TO PELICAN EDITION

    FOREWORD

1   Lords of the Earth
    In what Man differs from Ape - The living cell -
    From nerve-net to ganglia - Distinction of plant
    and animal - Sex orgies of the plants - Signifi­
    cance of mobility - Feedback, physical and
    metaphysical - Mutations and missing links -
    Emergence of brain - Lords of the sea - The great
    migration - Amphibian holocausts - Reptile and
    bird - The double-brained dinosaur - His 100
    million years reign - Survival of the mammals -
    Origin of sleep - Mastery of fire - Homeostasis,
    the inner calm.

2   A Mirror for the Brain
    The unsuspected organ - Other seats of the
    emotions - Foresight of Hobbes - Hartley’s ‘doc­
    trine of mechanism’ - Galvani’s key to the brain
    - Animal electricity - Experiments on a battlefield
    - Pavlov and classical physiology - Verifications
    at Cambridge - Berger discovers ‘the alpha
    rhythm’ - Golla foresees its clinical value -
    Adrian and Matthews demonstrate - Physiology
    accepts the brain - Variety of rhythms - Their
    cryptographic character - The toposcope ex­
    hibits ‘the enchanted loom’ - From clinical tech­
    nique to a science.

3   The Significance of Pattern
    Mew horizons for old controversies - Neither
    cocksureness nor defeatism - First notions of
    pattern - The raw material of order - Pattern­
    seeking origins of science - How sensation pat­
    terns reach the brain - The cerebral apparatus -
    Confusing taste and smell - Other hallucinations
    - Pain a separate sense - Touch and the brain’s
    handicap The art of touch - Refinement of the
    blind - Why deafness is so hard to bear - Some
    processes of vision - Why the eye must scan the
    scene - Its million transmission cables - Projec­
    tion room of the brain.


===== PDF PAGE 008 =====

Contents
    4      Revelation by Flicker                                 80
           Four periods of research - Discovery of other
           rhythms - Location of tumours - The flicker
           technique - New light on epilepsy - A functional
           atavism? - Maladies not diseases - Public flicker
           incidents - A feedback flicker device - The
           laboratory staff see visions - Illusions a clue to
           reality - The sense of time distorted - Final pro­
           cess of vision - Alpha and the moving image -
           A scanning device - How the mechanism may
           work - A general scanning theory possible.

    5      Totems, Toys, and Tools                              104
           Magical and mechanical images - How they im­
           press us - Some realities of Frankenstein - A new
            uestion for brain physiology - Interconnexion
           Sleory - Seven modes of existence - Fresh
            approach to working models - Such is life -
           Computors and organ-grinders - Automatic trams
           and other primitives - Ashby’s Homeostat, M.
           sopora M. speculatrix, ‘tortoise’ to the profane
           - Nine principles of organic construction - Un­
           expected behaviour - Conditions of true mimicry.

    6      Learning A bout Learning                             119
           Some theories summarized - The psychological
           approach - Instinct or imprint - Learning by
           repetition - The significance of failure - A long
           dawn of learning - Meaning means association -
           Pavlov’s discovery of inequality - His heterodox
           theory of types - Little known aspects of his
           work - How much? but not How? - Hints of
           learning mechanism - Brain records as crypto­
           grams - Illumination by toposcope - Function of
           rhythms in learning process.

    7      The Seven Steps from Chance to
             Meaning                                            139
           Converging paths of learning - The education of
           M speculatrix - Guesswork of the brain - The
           Black Box mystery - Rewards and punishments
           - The mechanism of association - The seven
           operations - God a mighty gambler - How the
           brain picks a double - A learning box named
           Cora - Some tests of validity - Breakdowns,
           human and mechanical - The penalties of intel­
           ligence - Abstraction and birth of an idea -
           Brain propaganda - A toposcope mystery
           solved - No learning not to learn.

    8      Intimations of Personality                           171
           Crossing the frontier - Rhythms related to age -
           Brainpnnts of the unborn - Rhythms of growing


===== PDF PAGE 009 =====

     children - Records of original sin? - Constancy
     of frustration - Surprises in delinquent boys -
     Records of self-control - Three ways of thinking
     - Test your alpha grouping - Differentiation of
     twins - Why Peggy and Michael quarrel -
     Designations for diplomats - Sex disturbances
     - Brainprints of genius - Old age and death -
     Lack of psychological correspondence - Psycho­
     surgery, symptomatic and other effects - Sum­
     mary of intimations.


9    Beyond the Waking Scene
     Vigilance and stability - Effect of closing eyes -
     The various stages of sleep - Rhythmic changes
     recorded - Utility of dreams - Patterns of
     slumber - The origin of sleep - ‘Failure to safety’
     - Relation to protective fits - A phylactic hypo­
     thesis - Nature of hysteria - Mystery of fatigue -
     Hypnotism and the learning process - Peculiar
     forms of behaviour - Second sight and telepathy
     - Is the brain a transmitter?


10   The Brain Tomorrow
     Summary - The duty of prediction - Education
     and the mind - A case for mentality - Meaning
     and causality - Future of psychiatry - The
     teacher’s Black Box - Dangers of one-way men­
     tality - Greater aptitudes of the brain - Montcs-
     sori method - A new deal for genius - Unreason
     of ‘inherited’ or ‘acquired’ - Chances of a new
     human species - An atomized world - More dele­
     gation without specialization - Application to
     better living.


appendix    A.   An Electric Model of Nerve

appbndix b.      The Design of M. speculatrix

appendix c. A Conditioned Reflex Analogue



A SHORT BIBLIOGRAPHY

index


===== PDF PAGE 010 =====



===== PDF PAGE 011 =====

Preface to Pelican Edition

The re-issue of this book as a Pelican eight years after its
original publication seems to suggest that its subject cannot
have developed much in that time. Fortunately for those of us
who are still engaged in the study of the living brain, this is not
the explanation for the survival of this work. Rather, the treat­
ment was so general and the inferences so tentative that it can
still serve its original purpose: to encourage the general reader
to include his own brain in his private philosophy. There is a
general law of survival in scientific thinking - assertions tend to
remain acceptable while denials lose their conviction.
   Imagination and explanation are positive acts of insight,
while refutation and scepticism as negative assertions need
enormous support and wither under their own scorn. Since this
book is mainly concerned with discovery, description, explana­
tion, and conjecture there is little that can be considered
positively wrong or grossly misleading. Of course it could be
vastly enlarged to cover recent progress, but that would be a
different sort of book, too massive to read for pleasure.
   If such additions were contemplated they would fall into four
headings: (1) technical advances, (2) accumulation of factual
knowledge, (3) development of hypotheses and theories, (4)
application of these techniques, facts, and theories to the prob­
lems of human society in the age of mass communication,
hydrogen bombs, and space travel.
   In order to help the reader who may wish for contemporary
refreshment, these desirable but imaginary additions may be
presented in summary.
   1. Brain research depends so directly on technical resources
that its direction of development can be predicted from ad­
vances in physics and engineering. This is because there are
almost no firmly established facts about brain function; every­
thing remains to be discovered, all problems are still to be
                                                                11


===== PDF PAGE 012 =====

The Living Brain
defined, every refinement of technique opens new possibilities
of understanding and application. All the methods of study
described in this book have multiplied and evolved rapidly and
effectively during the last decade. Where originally there was
perhaps one home-made apparatus strung together from war­
time scrap, there are now several hundred neat, trustworthy
instruments based on the same principles as the prototype, but
incorporating high-test components and devices developed for
precision radar and space-rockets.
   The most spectacular innovation has been the appearance of
transistors as alternatives to vacuum tubes in electrophysio-
logical equipment. First described in 1949 as academic curios­
ities these minute slivers of infinitely pure germanium and
silicon are now found everywhere in compact units as conven­
tional amplifiers and recorders, in experimental gear, inside
living organs, transmitting information from the brain or
muscles or heart by radio to remote receivers - and of course
in space-vehicles and satellites. These applications have not
only simplified established techniques: they have also brought
a whole new field into focus. Apparatus which used to fill a
whole room can now be carried by one man to remote sites, so
that people who could never be expected to enter a hospital or
laboratory can be studied in their own surroundings. The
activity of the brain can now be followed through a radio link
as normal people or patients go about their business, untram­
melled by direct connexion to the recording or analysing
apparatus.
   The passage of time has brought technical consolidation as
well as innovation. Many of the methods and observations de­
scribed in this book were fresh and tentative when it was written;
they are now widely disseminated and corroborated. During a
visit to Russia I was deeply gratified to find several of the wave
analysers which we had designed during the war (Chapter 2) in
constant use in Moscow University, and the method of activat­
ing brain mechanisms by flicker-feedback (Chapter 4) is now a
part of the routine procedure in the Neurosurgical Institute in
Leningrad. Of course, these and other methods are also well
known nearer their birthplace; but their acceptance in more
12


===== PDF PAGE 013 =====

                                 Preface to the Pelican Edition
remote and independent centres of scientific culture seems to
add to their status and value.
   The elaborate and sophisticated methods of brain research
outlined in Chapters 2 to 5 have been developed and applied so
extensively that they have been the subject of several inter­
national symposia and conferences. To the modest do-it-your­
self armoury of the physiologist have been added the big guns
of the electronic computer laboratories; these reinforcements
raise problems of their own. With small-arms fire one can
afford a considerable wastage and scatter, but with large calibre
artillery each round must be carefully aimed. A great deal of
time has been spent - and, some think, wasted - in applying
the expensive resources of general-purpose computers to prob­
lems which are too ill-defined to warrant such accurate and
extravagant analysis. • As the situation becomes clearer, so
methods will have to be more refined; but there is no advantage
in obliterating imaginary bastions with a barrage of binary
digits.
    The most intricate machine for brain study, the Toposcope,
has grown a new scale - a spiral coil of Time which tells us not
merely where but when and how quickly brain events occur. For
our current researches these details are essential; they have ex­
tended rather than refuted the claims and suggestions based on
the original records. The mating of science and art too rarely
achieves any progeny, but the strange assemblies of whirling
patterns in chiaroscuro generated by our latest display systems
suggest a gay pastiche of sunflowers and distant galaxies. We
hope that they reflect in some way the order and beauty of vital
 thought.
    Some technical possibilities - because of their expense or
 danger - cannot be exploited until their application is impera­
 tive for the alleviation of human suffering. During the last few
 years our understanding of human brain factors has reached
 the point at which it seemed justifiable to insert fine wire
electrodes in the brains of people suffering from intractable
 mental disturbances in order to eradicate the crippling symp­
 toms of despair, compulsion, and terror. These electrodes can
 be left in place for several months so that the progressive action
                                                                13


===== PDF PAGE 014 =====

The Living Brain
of the treatment can be followed and checked when it is at the
most favourable stage. This procedure involves particularly
close collaboration over a long period between clinicians, scien­
tists, and engineers, and the results in terms of human content­
ment have amply repaid the anxiety and labour. I must here
pay a tribute to my colleagues in medicine, surgery, and
physics; it is a rare and precious privilege to be associated with
such work. Seldom has the aim of human benefit been attained
with so large a gain of scientific information in so cordial an
atmosphere.
   Every now and then we say to ourselves - ‘this is the last
word, no method can be better than this, we shall never need
anything more’. This is, of course, a signal for another major
break-through somewhere in the community of science, and
our patient engineer is faced with a new problem of control or
display or miniaturization. Only a few months ago we learned
from a colleague how to apply to problems of nervous function
a new type of vacuum tube developed for radar that can store
vast quantities of numerical information and then give out the
stored data in the form of an average of all the separate obser­
vations. It is rather as though a public opinion pollster had a
black box into which his victims could speak their views and
which would then utter the average opinion, ignoring the off­
beats and don’t-knows and couldn’t-care-less replies. Applied
to the brain we find that this device, which is about the size and
shape of a beer bottle, can penetrate the neural noise and gossip
so that we can detect and recognize the specific or general
response to our sensory interrogation at levels of signal that
we never dreamed of before. The first results are still on our
desks, but they promise even better correlation of physical and
mental events to form a coherent set of propositions about the
mechanisms of mentality.
   2. The facts and discoveries amassed in recent years by the
elaboration and proliferation of these methods are so numerous
and inter-related that a summary would be a cross-indexed
catalogue. Alas, none of the problems outlined in this book
has been solved, in the sense that a mathematical problem is
solved. We cannot write equations for brain function, but at
14


===== PDF PAGE 015 =====

                                 Preface to the Pelican Edition
least we are beginning to see why and where the equations that
have been written let us down.
   The classical systems of mathematical expression deal admir­
ably with many of the physical phenomena around us - the
gross properties of matter, motion, velocity, acceleration, ex­
change of energy, and so forth. When the system is homo­
geneous (that is, consists of identical or indistinguishable units)
and when the interaction between units or systems is smoothly
graded over the range of observations, a mathematical or
logical description is adequate and explicit. But in biological
systems, particularly in the very complex ones such as the
human brain, we cannot assume either homogeneity or lin­
earity, and conventional mathematics are of limited value. We
have to consider the probabilities and discontinuities rather
than certainty and uniformity. Sometimes, simply in order to
make some sense of our observations, we have to regard the
brain as a ‘nerve gas’, a vast assembly of neurotic molecules
with statistically predictable behaviour. Then suddenly we
realize that our population of ten thousand million nerve cells
is more like a human society in which the action - or inaction -
of a few individuals can grossly perturb the whole society. The
same situation arises in fact in the study of human societies;
economic laws and political principles have been enunciated
and in some ways history repeats itself accordingly - but it is
always the unexpected that matters!
   So, in the study of information from experiments on brain
function, consistent repeatable results lose their interest and
become merely the background against which the important
discrepancies and deviations from ‘normality’ can be projected
and recognized. This is particularly clear and obvious in the
contemporary studies of learning and personality, the subject
of the later chapters. The imitation of living creatures by
working models has advanced and extended to the point where
there are several genera and species of artificial animals, dis­
playing many features of the flesh in metal counterparts. Even
at this lowly level personality and temperament appear as
‘errors’ or aberrations of predicted behaviour. Communication
between such synthetic individuals becomes dependent on
                                                                15


===== PDF PAGE 016 =====

The Living Brain
similarity of ‘language’. A device that responds to and emits
light signals cannot transact with one that depends on sound or
radio links. A machine that stores ‘experience’ as electric
changes on a set of capacitors cannot share its memories
directly with one using magnetic tape for the same purpose.
   The existence of similar tendencies in human beings is re­
ferred to in various passages in this book. Since they were
written, several experimenters have confirmed the reality of
these effects, but none of us has succeeded in explaining them
or estimating their real importance. We have some evidence
that similarities in the type of imagery and memory contribute
to the sense of affinity or antagonism between, human beings.
Two people with pronounced and vivid visual imagery tend to
feel at ease with one another, but their relationship is supple­
mentary rather than complementary, and if their basic aims in
life are different the superficial rapport may lead to later dis­
illusion. Contrariwise, people with very dissimilar modes of
imagination may feel awkward with one another at first, but by
making suitable allowances for one another’s idiosyncrasy they
can form a mutually regulating combination. In most complex
situations the Golden Rule is that there is no Golden Rule,
and in human relations every sort of association may be valu­
able and effective. There does seem a possibility that greater
self-knowledge in these matters could reduce the sum of human
misery, but we are still desperately ignorant of the real nature
of the mechanisms underlying these processes of memory,
imagination, and invention.
   Perhaps the most serious gap in our knowledge is in the
human genetics and inheritance of mental traits. We know that
many gross mental anomalies depend on genetic factors, and
studies of identical (monozygotic) twins have shown great
similarities in their electric manifestations of brain activity.
But the difficulty remains, that even very slight inborn ten­
dencies toward a particular mode of brain function are likely
to be vastly and progressively amplified or distorted by experi­
ence from the moment of birth or even conception. This is seen
most clearly and simply in handedness. The proportion of ex­
clusively left-handed adults is quite small - probably only about
16


===== PDF PAGE 017 =====

                                  Preface to the Pelican Edition
one-tenth of those born with a slight tendency to left-handed­
ness - obviously because of the social pressure toward literal
dexterity. But if the tendency to left-handedness (that is,
dominance of the right instead of the left half of the brain) is
above a certain threshold, the person concerned will be forced
to develop and exploit his tendency and may learn to use it to
great advantage, as any sportsman can testify who has ever had
a south-paw opponent. Such effects do not operate in the
simpler aspects of human inheritance; eye-colour and blood
groups, whatever their functional importance, if any, are not
modified by use or experience. So the dispute about nature and
nurture in relation to human character may continue; but it
should be abandoned as a bad way of expressing a complex
problem.
   Implicit in such arguments is the basic paradox of adaptation
in living creatures. How can a highly vulnerable, short-lived
organism select out of all the incomputable" chances and
changes of terrestrial existence just those features of real sig­
nificance to its survival and multiplication? Having selected
them - without serious error leading to destruction - how can
the vast number of signs and symbols be stored accessibly in
the confines of the skull? Having been stored, how can this
information be preserved without gross corruption and brought
together again to form new patterns of behaviour accurately
matched to the most probable situations so as to prolong and
extend the dominance of the individual? Of course, if this
account were an adequate summary of living phenomena they
would be entirely miraculous. We should recall, however, that
of simple organisms the vast majority are in fact failures.
Searching for ‘significance’ they back the wrong side and are
engulfed. Of more complex organisms - ourselves - the
 minority are failures, but the majority rely only partially on their
 own physiological equipment. The words you are reading come
 partly from my memory and imagination, very largely from
 the achievements of others contained in the books and records
 strewn over my desk and in libraries all over the world. They
 are preserved for your contemplation by the indulgence of the
 publisher and the skill of the printer. I myself cannot remember
                                                                   17


===== PDF PAGE 018 =====

The Living Brain
just what I wrote a few minutes ago - my storage system ex­
tends diffusely over the continents but excludes even my own
recent thoughts. Whether my selection of significance suits
your taste is a chance I must take - I can only assert that it
resembles reality sufficiently for this book to reach your hands.
   The practical implication of such musings is that, for us and
other social animals, the criteria of significance are largely
social. Only rarely are we forced to make individual selections
without verbal or social advice or instruction. The hypotheses
and conjectures about learning in Chapters 6 and 7 are con­
cerned mainly with these relatively rare but still essential
predicaments where a person must adapt his behaviour in
isolation and solitude. During the last few years we have been
trying to test these hypotheses by experiments using human
subjects in laboratory situations where they have to learn to
avoid a disagreeable (though harmless) penalty. They are pro­
vided with ample physiological information to succeed but are
not instructed or advised - they are not even told that they
should take any action at all. We find that this very simple
challenge to the mighty human brain presents great difficulties
to many intelligent and sophisticated people. In Chapter 7 it is
suggested that conditional learning is a probabilistic or statistical
process of establishing the significance of association between
two series of events. In our experiments the situation is de­
signed so that we can estimate the level of probability or sig­
nificance required by a person before he can make up his mind
that there is a pattern of events worth responding to. Through
our apparatus we are in effect asking a question like ‘How
often would a penny have to turn up heads before you would
bet how much that someone was cheating?’ As far as we can
tell at present, the answer is: not less than twenty; but many
people would not dare to bet at all. The commonest mistake in
this situation is to look for a sequence and this is evident too
in the popularity of gambling ‘systems’ that ignore the ineluct­
able laws of chance. The concentration of attention on time-
patterns of sequence rather than on association between events
is sometimes grossly exaggerated in nervous people. In several
types of mental disorder the ability of the brain to discern
18


===== PDF PAGE 019 =====

                                 Preface to the Pelican Edition
simple associations seems to have disappeared completely, even
when the patient’s general behaviour is only just outside the
normal range. Chronic fear, obsessional states, and feelings of
persecution are strongly linked with the inability to pick out
simple facts of association. The performance of many people
in these conditions is well below what would be expected of a
laboratory rat, let alone a Pavlov dog.
   3. Even a brief outline of observations such as the above
raises the problem whether, and how, they can be applied to the
general problems of human life and conflict. The scientific
interest of brain research is unquestioned and its relation to
clinical problems is obvious. The activity in this domain is now
so intense and widespread that an International Brain Re­
search Organization has been established under the sponsor­
ship of unesco to coordinate and promote advances in all
countries. As well as this essentially administrative body there
are several international federations and associations whose
prime interest is the study of the brain either as a scientific
phenomenon or clinical organ or mediator of behaviour.
   The number of international and inter-disciplinary symposia,
colloquia, conferences, congresses, study groups, and seminars
is already far too great for comfort and efficiency even in the
age of jet transport. A conscientious and fluent scientist could
spend his whole time attending meetings and editing transcripts
of his remarks. A new scientific type is emerging, the Confer­
ence Man, with bulging brief-case, drip-dry shirt, and many-
visaed passport. Most easily observed in airport waiting-rooms,
he occasionally re-appears in his laboratory to replenish his
stock of lantern slides with startling discoveries regurgitated by
his less mobile colleagues. While these migrant mouthpieces
collect their air-ticket counterfoils, the brain research centres
themselves struggle to make ends meet from savings and
charity. Many fine teams and brilliant investigations have
fallen to pieces for lack of funds less than the cost of a round
trip from Moscow to Los Angeles.
   There are exceptions to every generalization about human
affairs, but 1 would say that whereas the inception of scientific
ideas, discoveries, and inventions depends on personal accident,
                                                                19


===== PDF PAGE 020 =====

The Living Brain
their development and exploitation are simply a matter of
economics and finance. The history of the notable or notorious
advances during the last few decades illustrates this perfectly,
and so does brain research. Television, radar, jet propulsion,
nuclear energy were all implicit in the work and ideas of a few
men with very modest resources, high integrity, and the tra­
ditional scientific virtues of passion, patience, and serendipity.
The application of these ideas to human needs, human desires,
and human destruction came only when they offered an attrac­
tive investment compared with other ventures. In brain research
the essential and durable components of fact and theory are the
creation of perhaps a dozen or so people, many of them still
living and still working as pioneers. The ground they have
cleared is not yet a tempting field for general cultivation and
it is difficult to imagine it being so without a major conversion
of human interest. Self-knowledge should promote self-control,
but human beings resemble one another so much that control
of self implies control of others. So far brain physiology has
never lent itself to evil deeds as physics has done - we do not
have to drive people insane or experience insanity to win under­
standing of brain action. The more we know about the brain
the more we should respect the conditions of life which permit
a civilized development of its functions. Ethics, politics, re­
ligion, and all other considerations apart, the physiologist must
oppose all destructive tendencies of the sciences. But with in­
creasing understanding comes growing power, and there are
some who already see in our tentative essays the means for
effective thought-control - some with glee and some with
revulsion. To all such we say, as to politicians, preachers, and
psychiatrists: let only those whose hands are clean busy them­
selves with brain-washing.
   For me personally, apart from the clinical relief of suffering,
the most exciting and satisfying discoveries are those that
illustrate the real measurable differences between human beings
as they go about their business. The more elaborate our ex­
periments, the more clearly we appreciate the great range and
beauty of human personality, though it bedevils our charts and
tables. Whether the features of brain function which we can
20


===== PDF PAGE 021 =====

                                  Preface to the Pelican Edition
estimate play a great part in the growth of affinity into love or
of aversion into hate, we still cannot tell. In marriage, in school,
in industry, in games, human beings live in and through and
with one another - ‘no man is an island’. The ways in which
each of us can find in other people, perhaps in one person, the
amplification and fulfilment of his identity, can now we think
be glimpsed as a part of the entrancing mechanisms of cerebral
selection and imagination which are outlined in these pages.
  On the other side, the lust for power and control - so hard
for busy scientists to understand and forgive - are powerful
forces in us all. Science is the religion of change; scientists are
always changing their minds as their theories dissolve in con­
centrated fact. We who study the living brains of living people
have had to change our ideas very often and have as yet little
to offer in the way of a general philosophy. We are very thin
on the ground and not in a strong position to oppose effectively
those who seek to dominate - even at the risk of destroying -
the delicate fabric of human society in the name of dogmatic
religion or political theory or personal spite. In our laboratories
our regard for living creatures is so great that not even a single
mouse is sacrificed unless its dying can surely benefit the rest
of the world of life. To those who are confident in their attack
on human values, we who are certain only of our own ignor­
ance must say: ‘I implore you to think that you may be
mistaken.’
                                          W. Grey Walter
Bristol
January 1961


===== PDF PAGE 022 =====



===== PDF PAGE 023 =====

Foreword

This book is intended for general reading, for those who are
interested in themselves and other creatures. Most of it is
matter of recent discovery, but it has been presented simply so
that even the most unexpected information should be intel­
ligible to all. To some, the subject itself may seem risky: after
giving a series of talks on it in the Home Service of the B.B.C.,
I was told that one or two listeners said they felt a kind of im-
pudicity about brain surveying brain, as if suddenly coming
upon themselves for the first time naked in a looking-glass. Our
peeping here is as innocent as Alice and kinder than Analysis.
While mirroring indeed some parts of the human organism
too long hidden, this book will be found a gentle book. There
is no immodest exposure, no baring of the soul; nor any shatter­
ing of illusions, except perhaps for those who may have been
so simple-minded as to think the mechanism of mind simple.
Neither the new facts of life nor their philosophical conse­
quences are presented as conclusive. Fresh realms of knowledge
and conjecture are explored without pretence of reaching the
limits of either, their boundaries always receding as we advance.
Thus it is also a pious book if measured by standards of
habitual reverence for the known as well as the unknown in
face of successive revelations. Omar said: *1 have learnt
nothing from life except my own amazement at it.’ That is too
little, but it is a beginning. It is an aspect of the matter which to
some readers - modest, thoughtful, religious - may seem more
important than the excitement of discoveries, whatever their
clinical or social utility, or the desirability of removing error
from our way of thinking about the brain. And in this reverent
attitude to Man the author is with them, standing bareheaded
among the villagers where ‘still they gaz’d and still the wonder
grew That one small head could carry all he knew'.
                                                         W. G. W.


===== PDF PAGE 024 =====



===== PDF PAGE 025 =====

      1
Lords of the Earth
      Consider the original of all things, the
      matter they are made of, the
      alterations they must run through,
      and the result of the change. And that
      all this does no manner of harm.
                    Marcus Aurelius




By brain is meant, in the first instance, something more than
the pinko-grey jelly of the anatomist. It is, even to a scientist,
the organ of imagination. ‘Enchanted loom’ it was called by a
great physiologist. Another has likened it to a calm lake on
which ripple-systems weave patterns. The first image is a re­
minder that magic may be a function of mechanism. The
second invites us to embark on the surface of something deeper
than we know, and subject to storms.
   With licence of such teaching, we may begin by saying that
cogito ergo sum is physiologically true. Man, for our present
purpose, is specifically what he is by virtue of thought, and
owes his survival in the struggle for existence to the develop­
ment of that supreme function of brain. He is sapiens, the
thinking species of genus Homo - the discerning, discreet, and
judicious one, even if he does not always live up to all these
meanings of the name he has given himself. But the brain has
many other functions, so many and so various that it may be
well to proceed first by elimination.
   No other animal is equipped for being sapiens. It is in fact a
difference of equipment and not of opportunity. In terms of
behaviour, the gist of it is that, when we come across something
new, we do not necessarily respond to it at once in a particular
manner. We think it over. We can imagine making one of a
number of possible responses, and imagine it so clearly that we
can see whether it would be, if we made it, a mistake, without
                                                               25


===== PDF PAGE 026 =====

The Living Brain
 having to commit ourselves to action. We can make our errors
 in a thought and reject them in another thought, leaving no
 trace of error in us.
    Very early in the human story the brain must have acquired
 the mechanism of what we recognize in action as imagination,
calculation, prediction. Later came the process of abstract
 reason and the control of what we call violence. The operation
 of these mental controls, as will be seen, can be recorded as
electrical eddies swirling in subtle patterns through the brain.
But our most sensitive instruments, amplifying the electrical
changes ten million times or more, detect only isolated and in­
termittent elements of these higher functions in the brains of
other animals.
   Thus the mechanisms of the brain reveal a deep physio­
logical division between man and ape, deeper than the super­
ficial physical differences of most distant origin. If the title of
soul must be given to the higher functions in question, it must
be admitted that the other animals have only a glimmer of the
light that so shines before men. Aristotle’s frontier of learning
stands. The nearest creature to us, the chimpanzee, cannot
retain an image long enough to reflect on it, however clever it
may be in learning tricks or getting food that is placed beyond
its natural reach. Unable to rehearse the possible consequences
of different responses to a stimulus, without any faculty of
planning, the apes and other animals cannot learn to control
their feelings, first step towards independence of environment
and eventual control of it. The activity of the animal brain is
not checked to allow time for the choice of one among several
possible responses, but only for the one reflex or conditioned
response to emerge. The monkey’s brain is still in thrall to its
senses. Sentio ergo sum might be the first reflection of a slightly
inebriated ape, as it is often the last of alcoholic man; so near
and yet so far apart, even then, are they.
   The brain of lion, tiger, rhinoceros, and other powerful
animals also lacks the mechanism of imagination, or we should
not be here to discuss the matter. They cannot envisage changes
in their environment, so they have never sought to alter it in all
their efforts to retain lordship of their habitat. In case of flood.
26


===== PDF PAGE 027 =====

                                                Lords of the Earth
fire, frost, or desiccation they can only seek to replace their lost
amenities by ranging the forest, scanning desert or mountain, .
until they find them elsewhere, or die. It was not power that
won them survival in the earth’s changes of climate, but ther­
mostasis. Fortunately for them - and for us - the great reptiles
never acquired that knack of keeping the body temperature
from changing with the environment. Nor have their degenerate
descendants.
                 No shiver greets the wintry blast.
                 No drop of sweat the sun.
   The insects found a way out of the dilemma without fur or
 feathers, without shiver or sweat. Their challenge to human
supremacy would be vastly more serious than it is, had they
 not adopted a method of coping with adversity which imposed
 inevitably a limit on the evolution of true brain. Even creatures
of such notorious wisdom as ant and bee have had to make do
 with an intricate design of nerve-knots, or ganglia, in its place.
 Yet who would call brainless a creature which can return from
a long flight and report to its community, to within a few yards,
where it has discovered honey supplies? Appraised by results,
the bee is a highly developed mobile unit of a sedentary brain.
(Figure 1.)
   Thought and personality have already been left far behind;
individuality, still evident in dogs and cats, is not to be looked
for below the level of the centralized brain. Individual adjust­
ment is unknown to the totalitarian insects; it is more easy to
teach an octopus than an ant. Adaptation becomes a function
of the community, which however also seems to be chained to
the pattern of a species. Olaf Stapledon, the Virgil of science
fiction, whose soaring vision once lighted on a monstrous sessile
brain, divined that its communal mechanism would not be
compatible with anything that we should regard as personality.
   In honour of the bee it must be admitted that the ganglion
is in effect a bit of specialized brain. All creation paused for
many millions of years at that stage of neural progress. A vast
proportion of living things today have not reached it. The
jellyfish, for instance, has neither brain nor ganglia. A nerve-net
                                                                27


===== PDF PAGE 028 =====

The Living Brain
of simple cells is adequate for all its needs, the same convulsive
message being repeated over and over again, simultaneously
between all centres: push, push, push!
  This mechanism, elementary as it is, was an important step
toward the evolution of brain. It is already a responsive nerve
system. Nor is amoeba, pet of the schoolroom, to be excluded
from sentient and responsive life. In the presence of food near-




                             Figure 1
       ‘Difficulties of communication increase with the
                        number of units.'
        Main stages of evolution in organization of brain
            (a) Nerve-net (Arrested form: Jellyfish)
            (b) Ganglia System (Insects)
            (c) Nerve cord with Budding Brain (Lancelot)
28


===== PDF PAGE 029 =====

                                              Lords of the Earth
by, amoeba helps himself just as confidently as a child reaches
for a piece of cake on the tea-table.
   The response mechanism of amoeba’s one cell is activated
basically in the same way as each one of the ten thousand mil­
lion cells in our brain. Protoplasm in cellular form maintains a
precarious electro-chemical balance and, like an explosive, can
be fired by a trigger-action. Firing causes the cell to discharge
(with an emission of impulse) and at the same time to reload
and to re-cock the firing mechanism. This will sound familiar
to the troops; but the living cell has a refinement not possessed
by the machine-gun: the number of shots it fires is not deter­
mined by the length of time the trigger is pressed but by the
force, the intensity, with which it is pressed just once - that is,
by the strength of the stimulus. In plain words, the frequency
of discharge is modulated by the intensity of stimulation. The
importance of this frequency modulation, the dependence of
rate of fire on trigger pressure, in the internal economy of brain
function will appear later.
    Those who recall the simple amoeba of a past generation will
realize from this how much scientific notions about it have
changed. And consequently our notions about the physical and
mechanical basis of life itself and its different manifestations.
We have travelled far since Doncaster, leading authority on
the subject, could say in 1919 that ‘the word “cell” is beginning
to lose its definite and precise significance, and to be used rather
as a convenient descriptive term than as denoting a funda­
mental concept of biology’. And since Haldane and Huxley
could write in 1927 in their standard work on biology: ‘As a
 matter of fact, the only valid distinction between plants and
animals is concerned with the type of foodstuffs which they
can utilize.’
    Biology was transformed when the true properties of the cell
 were demonstrated. The simple cell has indeed gone; but it has
 gone the way of the simple atom - not quite such a long way, it
 is true, but far beyond the imagination of yesterday. Our ideas
 about them both have been transformed by a better under­
 standing of electrical mechanics. Underlying all physiological
 as well as physical events we discover other events ever more
                                                                 29


===== PDF PAGE 030 =====

The Living Brain
complex, more subtle. Unless ‘programmed’, we put our ques­
tions into forms which call for measured replies instead of yes
or no. The answers allow us to define differences rather than
proclaim distinctions.
   So the ‘valid distinction’ between plant and animal life must
be a summation of differences. The main difference lies not
so much in nourishment, mobility, or even basic substance,
as in mechanism. The response of plant cells is mechanically
different from that of animal cells: there is no transmission of
impulse from cell to cell. The plant cell is a simpler form of
life than the animal cell, more directly coupled to sun and
earth. It may not be the simplest. Where does life begin and
where is it not? The crystallographer is still exploring this field.
The chemist hesitates to set up a new division between organic
and inorganic matter. Many barriers have been swept away
since the non-Christian biologist discarded the frontier of the
soul.
   But, as in that case, under a dismantled barrier are often
found traces of some real division which it may have marked
or masked. We find such traces again, even while vaunting the
continuity of life, as we pass with our measuring rods across
the old frontier of the animal and vegetable kingdoms.
   Are orchids really a lower form of life than infusoria? Are
all plants immobile, all such innocent feeders? There is an
appearance of reflex action in a thousand varieties. Some turn
their blossom to the sun. Some bloom only in the dark, like the
cereus that waits on midnight or the convolvulus that unfolds
its moonlike blossoms at sunset. Venus’s flytrap not only
catches its prey but devours it. Countless devices lure the insects
to pander to the flowers. There seems no reason why, being
capable of collaboration in such diverse and complex ways,
plant cells should not have evolved into conductors of stimuli
also. The very simplicity of plant life, its serenity, its direct
access to the sun’s energy and the earth’s chemistry, might then
have been more advantageous to the evolution of brain than
the hurry-scurry of animal existence.
   Moralists might like to consider whether perhaps the failure
of the plants to take advantage of these ideal conditions to filch
30


===== PDF PAGE 031 =====

                                              Lords of the Earth
humanity’s prize, may have been a result of sexual indulgence.
In many millions of years of the hothouse life which earth
provided for the young vegetable species, anything might have
happened; mutations were the order of the day and any young
plant with a spark of originality in its cells might have struck
out on a new line. What happened so scandalously was that,
with a millennial shudder of awakening not unlike our minor
post-war rhapsody of a generation ago, the plant world dis­
covered sex. The vegetable kingdom, hitherto blossomless, was
swept by a delirium of public lovemaking into the fantastic
exhibitionism of the flowers; all except the cryptograms who,
as the name indicates, still cherish the clandestinity of liaisons
proper to a conservative society.
   This first carnival, on the organs of which we depend for our
main sustenance, took place some 150 million years ago, just
about the time when weak little creatures began to match their
wits against the great beasts. In the struggle for survival in a
cooling world, the prodigality of sex served the plants well.
Perhaps all the better in the absence of nerves. For although
it was a popular scientific notion a generation ago that plants
have a nerve system, no vegetable nerve action has ever been
satisfactorily demonstrated. The nearest approach to animal life
is found at the lowest level, in the cells of certain algae which
are so similar to nerve tissue that they have been used to cor­
roborate experiments on nerves.
   Plant cells are influenced by light, temperature, gravitation,
and moisture as well as contact. But plant responses to these
stimuli are not neural reflex actions. When a tendril touches an
object, for instance, it will curve with it and eventually encircle
it, only because each cell, as it comes into contact with the
object, is thereby checked in its growth, while the others un­
touched continue to grow, unaffected. The tendril is shaped by
its environment, once for all. In the same one-way manner a
plant reacts to the pull of gravity, to light and its withdrawal,
to the touch of insect feet. The stimulus must be received
directly by each cell. Also, the recovery of a plant cell, its re­
charging, is slow and uncertain. It is more like a water-pistol
than a machine-gun with improved trigger action. Only in rare
                                                                31


===== PDF PAGE 032 =====

The Living Brain
cases do plant cells achieve battery fire. Even then there is no
modulated frequency of firing; and no plant has another shot
in the locker until after a long interval for recovery, not even
the most sensitive of the Mimosa family - not M. sensitiva,
pudica, casta, pudibunda, or viva - not even M. palpitans.
   By virtue of its unitary rhythmic explosion, the animal cell
is mobile. And mobility appears to have been a main factor in
the next phase of organization.
   Geneticists find it difficult to account for simple mutations.
More than mutation now seems to take place in the emergence
of new nervous functions. Between amoeba and jellyfish is a
gap. We do not know how living things passed from the uni­
cellular to the multicellular stage. And later on the prolifera­
tion of nervous functions becomes bewildering. Increasing size
of the brain does not explain it. Whether growth allowed diver­
sification, or encouraged it, or was an effect of it, or was merely
contemporary, we can say with assurance that something more
took place than a multiplication of cells. Not by any stretch
of imagination could our organ of imagination have evolved
simply by the accumulation, one by one, or million by million,
of the necessary cells without the quite mysterious diversifica­
tion of them.
   Many other bodily adjustments besides increase of space and
the elaboration of its own vast communications system had to
be made for the most complex organ of all creation, an ap­
paratus of such proportions and such variety of function that
the giant computers with their thousands of valves are play­
things beside it. The changes in the nervous system itself are
stupendous - differentiation of nerve tissue, diversification of
cell, deviations into one specialization after another; lavish
emergence of completely new organs or, on the other hand,
adaptation of a vestigial one in such an economical manner
that parsimony, obvious necessity in the housing of the brain
itself, appears quite unexpectedly in the architecture of other
parts of the organism. And then, to cap it all, emancipation of
the brain from the very services for which it seemed to have
been millennially evolved, destined always to serve, its sole pur­
pose for ever.
32


===== PDF PAGE 033 =====

                                             Lords of the Earth
   Functionally, the only conjectural intermediary structure
between the one cell and the many is that of the sponges, if it
can be called structure. A sponge is an aggregation of uni­
cellular protozoa which have no observable cohesive agent;
yet, if you tear the live sponge to shreds and even put it through
a sieve, the cells will assemble again, like an organism rising
from the dead. There is nothing systematic, however, about
their agglomeration. If their resurrection is symbolic, their way
of association is a model for the anarchist and their inter­
communication a gift to telepathy.
   And now a structural miracle takes place in cellular life. Part
of the cell begins to stretch until it becomes specialized as an
electrical conductor. It stretches until the length of the cell is
as much as 100,000 times its breadth - a proportion unique in
life. Once association in a true organism thus becomes possible,
cells abandon extra-sensory perception and are quite materially
linked in a nerve-net, as in the jellyfish. Then comes the
moment - or the hidden process of many million years - in
which the inherent mobility of animal cell and organism ex­
ploits the next evolutionary jump.
   Anything that moves about increases its risks, runs into new
dangers. The protozoan scene under the microscope is one of
continual traffic jams and innumerable collisions. Jay-walkers
following their insensitive noses will be eliminated in the course
of a few million years. Before the days of aggressive beaks,
sensitive noses have a survival value. In the multicellular
world, among beings of more delicate construction than the
plastic single cell, there is an even higher premium on road-
sense, on steersmanship. We have to visualize an elementary
system of control by which the forward part of an organism can
obtain information and feed it back internally for guidance of
its operative motor-nerve centres. Such feedback control was
a commonplace of the physiologist long before the engineer
found common ground with him in ‘cybernetics’, a word to
which Norbert Wiener gave additional meaning when he
revived Ampere’s cybernetique, used more than a century ago
for ‘science of government’.
   This principle of steersmanship (literal derivation of the
   l.b.-2                                                      33


===== PDF PAGE 034 =====

The Living Brain
word) by feedback undoubtedly played a very important evolu­
tionary role in the first stages of animal life. Possibly even
before life appeared. Feedback as the first act of creation, or as
the process of continuous creation, is a pretty subject for the
metaphysician.

               Said a fisherman living at Nice:
               The way we began was like thees:
                 A long way indeed back
                 In chaos rode Feedback,
               And Adam and Eve had a piece.

   The young French writer on fish and philosophy, Pierre de
Latil, received this tribute to his metaphysics expounded in a
secluded Mediterranean paradise. Physiologically the theory is
conventional. Our hypothesis is that the first nervous system
evolved in this way from undifferentiated nerve-net. Some
distant cousin of jellyfish or starfish, spawned with a deformity
of its nerve-net, steered its way a little more safely through the
crowded primordial sea. The abnormally congested forward
units of the nerve-nets provided a dominant group of food-and-
danger predictors, overpowering with their local majority the
unorganized influence of the remaining few nerve-filaments.
So, profiting by the accident of its congenital deformity, the
worm-to-be survived a little longer than its normal fellows and
begat a race of creatures inheriting the tangled knots of nerve
in head and belly.
   Up to this point the function of the nerve-net was of the
simplest. As long as its job was the transmission or non-trans­
mission of an impulse - simpler than the alternatives, yes or
no - its organization was adequate. But difficulties of communi­
cation increase with the number of units; if at the same time
the variety of signals also increases, the whole organism will
soon become useless and break down.
   Some readers will be familiar with this problem of organiza­
tion. In 1940 thousands of us were concerned with a precisely
similar one in the mustering of the Home Guard. Early enthu­
siasts will remember that our first platoons were linked in per­
fect equality and in such a way that any information issued by
34


===== PDF PAGE 035 =====

                                              Lords of the Earth
any platoon was received by all. Each platoon had its own
intelligence officer. It seemed to be an excellent arrangement
for the immediate purpose, a simple one. Discovery of an
enemy paratrooper by any unit would at once be made known
to all; also the body of guards as a whole would suffer the
minimum inconvenience if a platoon were wiped out. But
presently the number and variety of duties increased. If every
order had to go to all, and every platoon had to send informa­
tion to all the others about everything, every member of every
platoon would be kept on the run, with nobody left to receive
the messages or act on them. So our cheery spontaneous system,
 formidable as it might be for some purposes, had to give way
to the traditional military centralization of intelligence and
 chain of command. (See Figure 1.)
    The progressive nervous system reached this point of re­
organization in the Cambrian era, some five hundred million
years ago, when plant life was still emergent in its primitive
 multi-cellular form of seaweed. Fossils reveal the appearance
 of it in the comparatively short-lived trilobites; it can be ex­
 amined in related species of that period which have remained
 practically unchanged to this day. In slugs and snails, limpets
 and starfish, the nerve-net was gathered up into centres of
 specialized ganglia, comparable with battalion headquarters.
     It should be made clear, however, that in tracing the progress
 of the nervous system from one form to another, no implication
 of direct descent of creature to creature is intended. Jellyfish
 is not a descendant of amoeba, mollusc of jellyfish, or man of
 chimpanzee. The stems of humblest origin are indeed the
 farthest apart. They rise diffusely from the swarming abyss of
 life, in which not one but innumerable missing links have
 perished. Since we have learned something about the basic
 electrical properties of all communication mechanisms we can
 speculate more freely about adaptation. Functional evidence
 allows us to piece together what otherwise makes little sense.
  Only scant bits of material evidence of neural development are
  to be found in fossil glimpses of the past, a procession of primi­
  tive orphans and bastards of unaccountable origin. Nor shall
  we ever know what innumerable freaks and monsters, their
                                                                 35


===== PDF PAGE 036 =====

The Living Brain
mutations being expendable, fell back unseen into the abyss.
The fossils leave gulfs between amoeba, jellyfish, and sponge,
between worm, trilobite, and mollusc, between starfish, crab,
and insect; moreover they isolate all these from the evolution­
ary branch that is our main concern, greatest and most mysteri­
ous of all, the fish and other vertebrates.
   Between ganglion and dorsal column, however, there is a
visible bridge. The lancelets, small fishlike creatures which
burrow in the sand of shallow warm waters, have a stiff neural
cord the length of their body, unprotected by bony covering.
For the zoologist they are a living link between invertebrate
and vertebrate; and this glimpse of neural evolution has been
clarified by the finding of a fossil of a similar creature that lived
in the Silurian age perhaps 350 million years ago.
   Millions of years before this, however, a cousin of the pri­
meval Iancelet had gone through a phase of evolution even
more critical than that of the transformation of ganglia into
nerve cord. The lamprey, living relic of the past, has a pro­
tective cartilage for its cord, its head has a rudimentary skull,
and in the skull is what we must accept, in the absence of any
evidence directly from the past, as the earliest model of the
primeval brain.
   In all there had been a labour of some thousand million years
between the protozoa and the emergence of an animal with a
brain. The first beneficiaries of this novel equipment, after
another evolutionary jump, were fish. The special nerve services
which it could provide, permitted them to take advantage of
fantastic mutations, many of which survive to this day. Besides
fish of every size from an inch to forty feet, there are fish of
every imaginable shape, including some truly eccentric sur­
vivals, such as those which grow a beard of imitation seaweed
or turn their snout into a fishing-rod.
   For the electro-physiologist the most ingratiating fantasy
that distinguishes the fishes from all other animals is their ex­
ploitation of the jellyfish invention, propagation of an electrical
impulse. Some hundred species generate potentials far in excess
of domestic requirements, up to 600 volts in one species, enough
to kill man or beast with its discharge. Their muscle cells are
36


===== PDF PAGE 037 =====

                                              Lords of the Earth
connected in series like a layer-built battery; but how this came
about and what could be the use of such a power-station is a
mystery. Possibly it was for defence. Some species use it for
navigation in muddy waters, others for communication - pio­
neer telegraphists of the deep. The supply of hundreds of volts
in any case is extravagant. The human brain needs to generate
only one-tenth of one volt for all its complexity of services.
   Nor was creation lavish in that era; the ductless glands,
thyroid and parathyroid, were in production then and both
were fashioned out of other vestigial organs. The parsimony of
nature, it will be seen later, is just as important as the wasteful­
ness which it is so much easier to observe and to imitate.
   With the fish we seem to pass for the first time beyond the
frontier of utilitarian life into a realm of fancy. Any visit to an
aquarium, or goggled plunge into a limpid sea, will suggest that
it is a world of playful childhood. As the ways of life get more
complex, play indeed becomes necessary, for learning to do
things upon which existence may depend. In play-pool or class-
pond, the fish brought up their young to inherit a lordship of
the sea which has never been disputed, even by the regressive
mammals who returned to it with the additional advantages of
a terrestrial education.
   With brain and spinal cord securely covered, vertebrate life
enters a succession of millions of years of fantastic and success­
ful adventure, including invasion of the land; but without
further important neural changes. The appearance of limbs,
from this point of view, is less surprising than the disappearance
of all the evidence of their evolution. Their bone was good
material for fossilization, but no fossils record the transition.
For all we know, the amphibia emerged from the shallows and
slime crawling on fins transformed overnight into limbs com­
plete with their five fingers, clutching therein evidence of their
starfish forbears. Late arrivals would find the land in possession
of creatures more primitive neurally but more advanced in
function. It was the first great test of the brain as organ of
survival.
   The insects were well enough equipped for a struggle.
Their ancestors had failed to take advantage of whatever
                                                                 37


===== PDF PAGE 038 =====

The Living Brain
opportunities may have been offered by genetic freaks and
deformities for advancement beyond the stage of ganglion. But
they had avoided the asymmetrical heresy that led some mollusc
cousins to the degradation of the gastropods. The insect ganglia
were usefully distributed in pairs in their segmental bodies; but
their external skeleton fatally hampered further neural develop­
ment. They had no brain to match against that of the amphibia.
Most of them eventually retreated, each species behind its iron
curtain, into the self-sufficiency of their various totalitarian
regimes.
   Brain had its part in making ‘huge leviathans Forsake un­
sounded deeps to dance on sands’, though the great migration
must have begun with smaller creatures, abnormal offspring of
fish. The Devonian and early Carboniferous beaches, one may
guess, were strewn with holocausts of freaks; and not only
freaks. ‘So careful of the type she seems, so careless of the single
life.’ But careless enough here of types. For, as life on the land
increased, the excitation of the change, the exposure to ultra­
violet and cosmic rays, would produce many sports and mon­
sters among the primeval sunbathers. There were amphibia of
very great size, and every variety of shape from elephantine to
serpentine. Their energy, however, seems to have been drained
in adapting to so many mutations. Earth knows them today
only in such survivors as the frog, a dwarf and degenerate (but
educationally useful) cousin of great Mastodonsaurus, first lord
of the land.
   Bird and reptile, emerging, were not at first distinct but
mingling in diversification, as seen in fossils of creatures that
had both bird and reptile characteristics. Their close relation­
ship is recorded in living species; the brain of birds is an elabor­
ation of the grade of structure shown by that of the crocodile.
Nor were birds the Wright brothers of the animal world; they
were only practising gliding when batlike reptiles took to the
air. Not flight but feathers was their distinction - and their
salvation.
   This is what was involved. The messages in a nervous system
travel at speeds dependent on temperature. If the organism
gets warm, the speed of signals increases, the creature becomes
38


===== PDF PAGE 039 =====

                                             Lords of the Earth
excited, perhaps delirious. If it gets cold, the messages slow
down, the whole organism becomes sluggish; the creature dozes,
sleeps, hibernates, or dies. The birds’ feathers saved them from
the fate of the improvident lords of the earth. The penguin is
so well clad that he retains his exquisite conjugal and social
awareness no matter how low the temperature.
   But there is something endearing also about the early mon­
sters. Edward Carpenter, the gentle Victorian anarchist poet,
mourns them, the web-footed beasts who had come -
    (Dear beasts!) - and gone, being part of some wider plan;
    Perhaps in his infinite mercy God will remove this Man!
   They were, improvident or not, lords of the earth for about
a hundred million years. Whether it was the heat or the even­
tual cooling of their perpetual paradise that was fatal to them
we shall never know; but the sun certainly would be intoxicat­
ing, as it always is to those who seek it from afar. Until a few
million years ago their ancestors had never experienced a blood
temperature higher than that of the sea. They emerge in the
blaze of the Triassic and mature in the moist heat of the
Jurassic and Cretaceous ages. Because of their size they have
been given a bad name for sluggishness and stupidity. Slow they
must have been when cool nights came; on a cold morning
anyone could bite off a bit of Diplodocus s tail and literally get
away with it before the monster had time to look around; the
signal would take so long to reach the pelvic brain, part of the
creature’s solution of his communications problem; still longer
if it had to be referred to his other brain for choice of action.
For this creature had two sets of brains,
                One in his head, the usual place,
                The other at the spinal base.
                Thus he could reason a priori
                As well as a posteriori.
  The upper brain, extremely small for the size of the beast,
may have been specialized for higher services, however, since
so many of the lower ones were evidently taken over by its
pelvic assistant. It was large enough to be aware of, and devise
                                                                39


===== PDF PAGE 040 =====

The Living Brain
answers to, a small vocabulary of simple sounds used for com­
munication - perhaps as many as those of the Hayes family
ape - and for the creature to be able to learn to play. Assuredly
young Diplodocus spent much time in play to get used to bal­
ancing his enormous bulk - forty tons or so - and managing
his thirty-foot tail.
   He was a peaceful vegetarian, this greatest of the dinosaurs,
supreme land giant of all time. No doubt he Was careful of the
huge eggs his mate produced, and took paternal interest in his
young universal heirs as they disported themselves like Olym­
pian kittens chasing their tails in slow motion. Their play must
have been as funny to him, seeing them lurch and flop about
in the warm shallows, as the stumble of a comedian perennially
is to his audience; until their swaying steps gained confidence
and rhythm and the pattern of their play acquired the dignity
of a ponderous minuet.
   The sex life of these monsters has been, like that of the
flowers, a matter of scandal. Certainly they were subject to
periods of excessive excitement, not months but millennia. They
were also, in their dual brain structure, a physical protoype of
schizophrenia. It has been suggested that in the hot-house
Jurassic age they became racially delirious and passed into a
sexual madness which led to sterility and race suicide. Another
theory, that of the soldier, points to evidence of great dino-
saurian armament; in defence against carnivorous enemies,
only those could survive who themselves became carnivorous
and were protected by fantastic armour plates and spikes. Some,
like the American Stegosaurus, armed heavily for defence;
others, like Tyrannosaurus, fifty feet of frightfulness, for
attack. But in all their lordship of more than ten thousand
times the length of historical time, the dinosaurs as a race never
made up their minds, never adapted racially, either to defence
or attack. Looking back, in the midst of our own indecision in
a similar dilemma, we can see that the question, furiously as
it was contested in genetic mutations and adaptations, turned
out to be completely irrelevant to their survival. They had
missed something more valuable to life than the most formid­
able armament of either kind.
40


===== PDF PAGE 041 =====

                                             Lords of the Earth
   Children are still sometimes taught that the distinction be­
tween reptile and mammal is that the one is a cold-blooded
animal and the other warm-blooded. This is misleading and less
interesting than the facts. The blood temperature of a snake or
a dinosaur beside you on a hot afternoon in the tropical sun
would be many degrees higher than yours. When nights began
to get cool, the activity of the dinosaurs’ nervous system fell
with their body temperature, only to resume in the warmth of
the morning.
    The emergent mammals participated in this thermal alterna­
tion of nervous activity, before their saving asset, thermostasis,
had evolved. This nocturnal reduction of nervous energy may
have been the origin of our otherwise unaccountable habit of
 protracted sleep. There is no evidence that it arose from any
need of recuperation. But when every noon was a climax of
such excitation and activity as we can observe today only in
convulsions, fatigue may have been averted by the slowing
down of the primeval mechanism. There will be more to say
 about this and other aspects of sleep later.
    The acquisition of internal temperature control, thermostasis,
 was a supreme event in neural, indeed in all natural history.
 It made possible the survival of mammals on a cooling globe.
That was its general importance in evolution. Its particular
 importance was that it completed, in one section of the brain,
an automatic system of stabilization for the vital functions of
the organism - a condition known as homeostasis. With this
 arrangement, other parts of the brain are left free for functions
not immediately related to the vital engine or the senses, for
functions surpassing the wonders of homeostasis itself.
    The matter is epitomized in a famous saying of the French
 physiologist, Claude Bernard: La fixitd du milieu interieur est
la condition de la vie libre. Those who had the privilege of
sitting under Sir Joseph Barcroft at Cambridge owe much to
him for his expansion of this dictum and its application to
 physiological research. We might otherwise have been scoffers;
for ‘the free life’ is not a scientific expression. He translated
 the saying into simple questions, and guided us to the answers.
‘What has the organism gained’, he asked, ‘by the constancy
                                                               41


===== PDF PAGE 042 =====

The Living Brain
of temperature, constancy of hydrogen-ion concentration, con­
stancy of water, constancy of sugar, constancy of oxygen, con­
stancy of calcium, and the rest?’ With his gift for quantitative
expression, it was all in the day’s work for him to demonstrate
the individual intricacies of the various exquisitely balanced
feedback mechanisms. But I recall in his manner a kind of
modest trepidation, as if he feared we might ridicule his flight
of fancy, when he gave up this illustration of homeostasis and
its peculiar virtue:

How often have I watched the ripples on the surface of a still lake
made by a passing boat, noted their regularity and admired the
patterns formed when two such ripple-systems meet . . . but the
lake must be perfectly calm. ... To look for high intellectual de­
velopment in a milieu whose properties have not become stabilized,
is to seek . .. ripple-patterns on the surface of the stormy Atlantic.

   Homeostasis is common to all mammals, with many varia­
tions in the details of its mechanisms. One of the most curious
of these variations concerns Homo sapiens. It throws no light
indeed on his origin but rather clouds the common theory. For
in this respect it would seem that his ancestors were more
closely related to horse than to ape. Man and horse, in offset to
excessive heat, sweat; the apes and other beasts do not. Only
isolated and intermittent evidence of any higher significance is
found in the ripple-systems of other brains than that of man.
For the mammals all, homeostasis was survival; for man,
emancipation. (Figure 2.)
   About one prehistoric result of this emancipation we may
conjecture with some assurance: man’s mastery of fire. The
Prometheus legend may well be the rationalization of a tradi­
tion, just as Chinese familiarity with dragons may go right back
to Pekin man’s acquaintance with the last of the dinosaurs. It
would be surprising if no memory, in any form, remained of
this event, the denouement of the mammalian story, the final
action in the closing scene of the whole drama of man as an
animal among animals, determining his final usurpation of the
lordship of the earth. Whatever the circumstances of the many
incidents occurring through the ages, whereby man’s attitude
42


===== PDF PAGE 043 =====

                                                  Lords of the Earth
to fire became differentiated from that of all the other animals,
this must have occurred through the statistically selective func­
tion of the human brain. Within the increased area of the cortex
of the ancestral organ was evolving a mechanism capable of
the new series of processes: observation, memory, comparison,
evaluation, selection. As these processes evolved, man began to
remember incidents of damage and danger from fire. Unlike the
                               CENTRAL




                                                   DRINK
                                                   BALANCE
                               Figure 2
         \.. but the lake must be perfectly calm ..
  The upper brain is freed from the menial tasks of the body, the regu­
         lating functions being delegated to the lower brain

other animals, or the merely animal child of the proverb, man,
being burnt, did not fear fire; he watched it carefully, calculat-
ingly; he accepted the odds and sought to improve them in
favour of escaping fresh hurt. He was learning which end of
a burning stick he could grasp with impunity.
  Man by that time may already have been a tool-maker, but
even a monkey will use a stone to crack a nut; the taming and
use of fire raised man indeed to Promethean heights, master
                                                                          43


===== PDF PAGE 044 =====

The Living Brain
not of a tool but of a force. The flinging of the first flaming
brand to scare the beasts away from the mouth of the cave was
a profoundly greater gesture in the human story than the drop­
ping of the first atom bomb, its modern elaboration.
   Man’s mastery of fire, however, grandiose as were the hori­
zons it illuminated, is still in the class of physical evolution; one
of the apes, with a bit of extra brain and a bit of luck, might
equally well have started on the road that led to your fireside.
Homeostasis allowed more than this. The perfect calm of Bar-
croft’s lake was to be stirred by still stranger ripple-systems,
whose meaningful crossing and re-crossing will be described in
later chapters.
   And once again, as new horizons open, we become aware of
old landmarks. The experience of homeostasis, the perfect
mechanical calm which it allows the brain, has been known for
two or three thousand years under various appellations. It is
the physiological aspect of all the perfectionist faiths - nirvana,
the abstraction of the Yogi, the peace that passeth understand­
ing, the derided ‘happiness that lies within’; it is a state of grace
in which disorder and disease are mechanical slips and errors.


===== PDF PAGE 045 =====

      2
A Mirror for the Brain

      Let’s pretend there’s a way of getting
      through it somehow, Kitty. Let's
      pretend the glass has got all soft like
      gauze, so that we can get through.
      Why, it’s turning into a sort of
      mist now, I declare! It’ll be easy
      enough to get through -
           Alice Through the Looking-glass


The Greeks had no word for it. To them the brain was merely
‘the thing in the head’, and completely negligible. Concerned
as so many of them were about man’s possession of a mind,
a soul, a spiritual endowment of the gods, it is strange they did
not anticipate our much less enterprising philosophers of some
score of centuries later, and invent at least a pocket in the head,
a sensorium, to contain it. But no, the Greeks, seeking a habita­
tion for the mind, could find no better place for it than the
midriff, whose rhythmic movements seemed so closely linked
with what went on in the mind.
   The Hebrews also attributed special dignity to that part of
the body; thence Jehovah plucked man’s other self. Old ideas
are not always as wide of the mark as they seem. The rhythm
of breathing is closely related to mental states. The Greek word
for diaphragm, tpgrjv, appears in such everyday words as frenzy
and frantic, as well as in the discredited phrenology, and the
erudite schizophrenia.
   Above the midriff the classical philosophers found the
vapours of the mind; below it, the humours of the feelings.
Some of these ideas persisted in physiological thought until the
last century and survive in the common speech of today.
Hysteric refers by derivation to the womb. The four basic
human temperaments were: choleric, referring to the gall
                                                                45


===== PDF PAGE 046 =====

The Living Brain
bladder; phlegmatic, related to inflammation; melancholic,
black bile; and sanguine, from the blood. This classification
of temperaments was revived by a modern physiologist, Pavlov,
to systematize his observations of learning.
   As in nearly all notions that survive as long as these fossils of
language have survived, there is an element of truth, of observa­
tion, in them. States of mind are certainly related to the organs
and liquors designated, and may even be said in a sense to
originate in them. The philosopher William James was respon­
sible with Lange for a complete theory of emotion which in­
voked activity in the viscera as the essential precursor of deep
feeling. Some of the most primitive and finest phrases in English
imply this dependence of sincere or deep emotion on heart or
bowels. But communication of thought is so rapid that the
Greeks overlooked the existence or need of a relay station. And
no doubt it is for the same reason that we all seem particularly
given to the same error of over-simplification when we first
begin, or refuse to begin, to consider how the mind works. We
know what makes us happy or unhappy. Who, in the throes of
sea-sickness, would think of dragging in the brain to account
for his melancholy state?
   More curious still is Greek negligence of the brain, consider­
ing their famous oracular behest, ‘Know thyself. Here indeed
was speculation, the demand for a mirror, insistence upon a
mirror. But for whom, for what? Was there, among the mys­
teries behind the altar, concealed perhaps in the Minerva myth,
a suspicion of something more in the head than a thing, and
that the organ which had to do the knowing of itself must be an
organ of reflection?
   The brain remained for more than two thousand years in the
dark after its coming of age. When it was discovered by the
anatomist, he explored it as a substance in which might be
found the secret dwelling of intelligence; for by that time the
mind had moved from the diaphragm to the upper storey, and
Shakespeare had written of the brain, ‘which some suppose the
soul’s frail dwelling-house’. Dissection was high adventure in
those days. Most people believed what an ironical writer today
was ‘astonished to learn’, that ‘it is possible for anger, envy,
46


===== PDF PAGE 047 =====

                                        A Mirror for the Brain
hatred, malice, jealousy, fear, and pride, to be confined in the
same highly perishable form of matter with life, intelligence,
honesty, charity, patience, and truth’. The search for such prize
packets of evil and virtue in the brain tissue, dead or alive,
could only lead to disappointment. The anatomist had to be
satisfied with weighing the ‘grey matter’ - about fifty ounces
for man and five less for woman - and making sketches of the
very complicated and indeed perishable organization of nerves
and cells which his knife revealed. He could do little more. It
should enlighten us at once as to the essential character of brain
activity, that there was no possible understanding of the mech­
anism of the brain until the key to it, the electrical key, was in
our hands.
   There were some flashes of foresight, sparks in the scientific
dark, before Galvani put his hand on the key. What generated
all the speculations of the day was a new notion in science, the
conception of physical motion which began to acquire import­
ance with Galileo and continued with Newton and into our own
times with Rutherford and Einstein. First among these imagina­
tive flashes may be mentioned the novel proposal made by the
seventeenth-century philosopher Hobbes, when disputing the
dualist theory of Descartes. The French philosopher contem­
plated a non-spatial mind influencing the body through the
brain, and suggested the pineal gland as the rendezvous for
mind and matter. The proposal advanced by Hobbes, in reject­
ing this popular theory, was that thought should be regarded
as being produced by bodies in motion. Hobbes was born in the
year of the Spanish Armada; the Royal Society had received its
charter seventeen years before he died in 1679.
   The controversy about the residential status of the mind is
almost as much out of date as that in which the non-existence
of motion seemed to be proved by the hare and tortoise fable.
But the value of Hobbes’s speculation was enduring; the observ­
ation and correlation of mental and physical phenomena are
today a routine of physiological research.
   More specific than the speculation of Hobbes was that of Dr
David Hartley about a century later. Hartley in 1749 anticipated
by two hundred years the kind of theory of mental function
                                                               47


===== PDF PAGE 048 =====

The Living Brain
for which evidence has been found in the last year or two.
His Observations on Man, his Frame, his Duty and his Expect­
ations is a milestone in the history of English thought. Hartley,
a contemporary of Newton and Hume, was a pioneer of what
he termed the ‘doctrine of mechanism’. According to this, he
suggested, mental phenomena are derived from rhythmic move­
ments in the brain - vibrations, he called them; upon these is
superimposed a fine structure of ‘vibratiuncles’ which gave
thought and personality their subtle shades and variations.
Hartley realized quite well the value of the plastic and compact
virtues such a system might have. He was also the first to
develop the theory of ‘association of ideas’ in a rigorous form,
relating this with his ‘vibratiuncles’ in a manner which we
should now consider strictly scientific in the sense that it is
susceptible to experimental test. It is difficult for us to appre­
ciate the originality of his notions, the gist of which is now a
commonplace of electrophysiology.
   Hartley wrote nearly half a century before Galvani (1737—
98) and with him we might say farewell to fancy. But to pass
over the famous Galvani-Volta controversy with the bald
statement that the one claimed to have discovered electricity
in animals and the other its generation by metals, would be
unfair to any reader who may not know how strangely truth
came out of that maze of error.
   The incident began with an experiment made by Luigi and
Lucia Galvani in the course of their long and patient study of
that still fresh mystery, electricity. The word had been in use
since William Gilbert coined it in the sixteenth century from
elektron, meaning amber, another pretty semantic shift; and
Henry Cavendish had already, eight years before the incident,
determined the identity of its dynamic laws with those of
gravitation. Everybody in high society was familiar with
the effects of discharges from Leyden jars upon the lifeless
muscles of executed criminals; and Louis XV had, in the words
of Silvanus Thomson, ‘caused an electric shock from a battery
of Leyden jars to be administered to 700 Carthusian monks
joined hand to hand, with prodigious effect’. But in Bologna in
 1790 the professor of anatomy had a notion that it was atmo­
48


===== PDF PAGE 049 =====

                                         A Mirror for the Brain
spheric electricity which acted upon the muscle tissues of
animals. On a stormy evening, one version of the story goes, he
and his wife had the curious idea of testing this point by tying
a dead frog to the top of the iron balustrade of the courtyard,
apparently using copper wire to hold it by the leg. They ex­
pected that, as the storm approached the frog would be con­
vulsed by electric shocks. And, as they watched the thunder
cloud come near, so indeed it happened; the frog, hanging
against the iron grille, twitched in repeated convulsions.
   Further experiments convinced the Galvanis that they had
witnessed a form of electricity derived from living processes,
not merely from the atmosphere. He published a famous
account of his experiments on the relation of animal tissue to
electricity: De viribus electricitatis in motu musculari com-
mentarius (1791). Volta seized upon this to refute the whole of
Galvani’s thesis, repeating his experiment not only without the
storm but without the frog, proving that the electricity in ques­
tion could be generated by copper and zinc sheets. This ‘current
electricity’, as it was called, was therefore metallic, and no non­
sense about any animal variety. So ended a controversy and a
friendship. So began the science of electrical engineering.
   Eppur, the Galvanis might have repeated, si muove. For their
discredited experiment had truly revealed, not indeed what they
supposed, but something more wonderful. What had happened
was that, swaying in the wind, the suspended frog had come
into contact with the iron bars, between which and the copper
wire a current had been generated, activating its muscles. The
Galvanis had demonstrated the electrical aspect of nervous
stimulation.
   This was an event as important to the physiologist as its
counter-event was to the physicist; it was the starting-point of
that branch of the science with which we are concerned here,
electrophysiology.
   Volta’s counter-demonstration led directly to the invention
of the electric battery, and economic opportunity evoked elec­
trical engineering from the Voltaic pile. There was no such
incentive for research when, a generation later, the existence
of animal electricity was proved. Instead, the discovery was
                                                                49


===== PDF PAGE 050 =====

The Living Brain
exploited by the academic dilettante and the quack. The Aristo-
telean doctors of the period, assuming that where there is elec­
tricity there is magnetism, saw in it proof also of Mesmer’s
‘Propositions’ which had been published in his Mtmoire sur la
dicouverte du magnetisme animal in 1779, floundering deeper
into mystification than Dr Mesmer himself, who had at least
declared in his 'Memoire that he used the term analogically,
and that he ‘made no further use of electricity or the magnet
from 1776 onwards’.
   There is still controversy about the origin and nature of
animal electricity. Nobody who has handled an electric eel will
question the ability of an animal to generate a formidable volt­
age; and the current is demonstrably similar in effect to that of
a mineral dry cell. On the other hand, there is no evidence that
the electric energy in nerve cells is generated by electro­
magnetic induction or by the accumulation of static charge.
The biochemist finds a complicated substance, acetylcholine,
associated with electric changes; it would be reasonable to
anticipate the presence of some such substance having a role
at least as important as that of the chemical in a Leclanche cell.
We know that living tissue has the capacity to concentrate
potassium and distinguish it from sodium, and that neural
electricity results from the differential permeability of an inter­
face, or cell-partition, to these elements, the inside of a cell be­
ing negatively charged, the outside positively. Whether we call
this a chemical or an electrical phenomenon is rather beside the
point. There would be little profit in arguing whether a flash-
lamp is an electrical or chemical device; it is more electrical
than an oil lamp, more chemical than a lightning flash. We shall
frequently refer to changes of potential as electrical rhythms,
cycles of polar changes, more explicitly electrochemical
changes. We shall be near the truth if we keep in mind that
electrical changes in living tissue, the phenomena of animal
electricity, are signs of chemical events, and that there is no
way of distinguishing one from the other in the animal cell or
in the mineral cell. The current of a nerve impulse is a sort of
electrochemical smoke-ring about two inches long travelling
 along the nerve at a speed of as much as 300 feet per second.
50


===== PDF PAGE 051 =====

                                          A Mirror for the Brain
   The neglect and mystification which obscured Galvani’s dis­
covery, more sterile than any controversy, forced electrophysio­
logy into an academic backwater for some decades. A few
experiments were made; for example, by Biedermann, who
published a two-volume treatise called Electrophysiology, and
by Dubois-Reymond, who introduced Michael Faraday’s in­
duction coil into the physiological laboratory and the term
faradization as an alternative to galvanization into the physio­
therapist’s vocabulary. Faraday’s electrical and electrifying re­
search began in 1831, date also of the foundation of the British
Association for the Advancement of Science; but physiology
long remained a backward child of the family.
   Hampered though these experimenters were by lack of trust­
worthy equipment - they had to construct their own galvano­
meters from first principles - they gradually accumulated
enough facts to show that all living tissue is sensitive in some
degree to electric currents and, what is perhaps more important,
all living tissue generates small voltages which change dramatic­
ally when the tissue is injured or becomes active.
   These experiments were not concerned with the brain; they
were made on frogs’ legs, fish eggs, electric eels, and flayed
vermin. Nor could the brain be explored in that way.
            Following life through creatures you dissect,
          , You lose it in the moment you detect.

   It took a war to bring the opportunity of devising a technique
for exploring the human brain - and two more wars to perfect
it. Two medical officers of the Prussian army, wandering
through the stricken field of Sedan, had the brilliant if ghoulish
notion to test the effect of the Galvanic current on the exposed
brains of some of the casualties. These pioneers of 1870, Fritsch
and Hitzig, found that when certain areas at the side of the
brain were stimulated by the current, movements took place in
the opposite side of the body.
   That the brain itself produces electric currents was the dis­
covery of an English physician, R. Caton, in 1875.
   This growing nucleus of knowledge was elaborated and
carried further by Ferrier in experiments with the ‘Faradic
                                                               51


===== PDF PAGE 052 =====

The Living Brain
current’. Toward the end of the century there was a spate of
information which suggested that the brain of animals pos­
sessed electrical properties related to those found in nerve and
muscle. Prawdwicz-Neminski in 1913 produced what he called
the ‘electrocerebrogram’ of a dog, and was the first to attempt
to classify such observations.
  The electrical changes in the brain, however, are minute.
The experiments of all these workers were made on the exposed
brains of animals. There were no means of amplification in
those days whereby the impulses reaching the exterior of the
cranium could be observed or recorded, even if their presence
had been suspected. On the other hand, the grosser electrical
currents generated by the rhythmically contracting muscles of
the heart were perceptible without amplification. Electrocardi­
ography became a routine clinical aid a generation before the
invention of the thermionic valve made it possible to study the
electrical activity of the intact human brain.
  From an unexpected quarter now came an entirely new
development. Turn up the section on the brain in a pre-war
textbook of physiology and you will find gleanings from clinical
neuro-anatomy and - Pavlov. Almost as if recapitulating the
history of physiological ideas, Pavlov’s work began below
the midriff. He found that the process of digestion could
not be understood without reference to the nervous system,
and so commenced his laborious study of learning in
animals.
   In the gospel according to Stalin, Pavlov founded not merely
a branch of physiology as Galvani had done, but a whole new
science - Soviet physiology. His work indeed was original; it
owed nothing to Galvani, lying quite outside electrophysiology,
to which it was nevertheless eventually, though not in Pavlov’s
day, to contribute so much in the way of understanding.
   For nearly two generations Pavlov’s experiments were the
sole source of information on brain physiology. Workers in
the English laboratories had not permitted themselves to ex­
plore further than the top of the spinal cord. One took an
anatomical glance at the brain, and turned away in despair.
This was not accountable to any peculiar weakness of physio­
52


===== PDF PAGE 053 =====

                                          A Mirror for the Brain
 logical tradition but to the exigencies of scientific method itself.
 A discipline had been building up through the centuries which
demanded that in any experiment there should be only one
variable and its variations should be measurable against a con­
trolled background. In physiology this meant that in any
experiment there should be only one thing at a time under
investigation - one single function, say, of an organ - and that
the changes of material or function should be measurable.
There seemed to be no possibility of isolating one single vari­
able, one single mode of activity, among the myriad functions
of the brain. Thus there was something like a taboo against the
study of the brain. The success of Pavlov in breaking this taboo
early in the century was due to his contrivance for isolating his
experimental animals from all but two stimuli; his fame rests
on his measurement of responses to the stimuli.
   There was no easy way through the academic undergrowth
of traditional electrophysiology to the electrical mechanisms
underlying brain functions. The Cambridge school of electro­
physiology, under a succession of dexterous and original experi­
menters beginning toward the end of the last century, developed
its own techniques in special fields of research, particularly in
the electrical signs of activity in muscles, nerves, and sense
organs. At the same time, the Oxford school under the leader­
ship of Sherrington was beginning to unravel some of the
problems of reflex function of the spinal cord. In both these
schools the procedure adopted, to comply with the traditional
requirements of scientific method, was to dissect out or isolate
the organ or part of an organ to be studied. This was often
carried to the extreme of isolating a single nerve fibre only a
few thousandths of a millimetre in diameter, so as to eliminate
all but a single functional unit.
   Imagine, then, how refreshing and tantalizing were the
reports from Pavlov’s laboratory in Leningrad to those engaged
on the meticulous dissection of invisible nerve tendrils and the
analysis of the impulses which we induced them to transmit.
After four years spent working literally in a cage and chained
by the ankle - not for punishment but for electrical screening -
enlargement came when my professor of that date, the late
                                                                  53


===== PDF PAGE 054 =====

The Living Brain
Sir Joseph Barcroft, assigned me to establishing a laboratory
in association with a visiting pupil of Pavlov, Rosenthal. We
spent a year or so on mastering the technique and improving it
by the introduction of certain electronic devices. The Russian
results were confirmed. To do more than this would have
required staff and equipment far beyond the resources of the
Cambridge laboratory.
   Meanwhile, another major event in the history of physiology
had taken place. Berger in 1928 at last brought Hartley’s vibra­
tions into the laboratory and with them a method which seemed
to hold out the promise of an investigation of electrical brain
activity as precise as were the reflex measurements of Pavlov.
When Pavlov visited England some time after we heard of this,
as the English exponent of his work I had the privilege of
discussing it with him on familiar terms. Among other things,
I asked him if he saw any relation between the two methods of
observing cerebral activity, his method and Berger’s. The latter,
I was even then beginning to suspect, might in some way provide
a clue to how the conditioning of a reflex was effected in the
brain. But Pavlov showed no desire to look behind the scenes.
He was not in the least interested in the mechanism of cerebral
events; they just happened, and it was the happening and its
consequence that interested him, not how they happened. Soviet
physiology embalmed the body of this limited doctrine as
mystically as the body of Lenin, for the foundations of their
science. The process of conditioning reflexes has a specious
affinity with the Marxian syllogism. Others have found in the
phenomena substantiation for a gospel of Behaviourism.
   Pavlov was before his time. He would have been a greater
man, his work would have been more fertile in his lifetime,
and Russian science might have been spared a labyrinthine
deviation, had the work of Berger come to acknowledgement
and fruition in his day. But again there was delay; Berger
 waved the fairy wand in 1928; the transformation of Cinderella
 was a process of years.
   There were reasons for this delay. For one thing, Berger was
 not a physiologist and his reports were vitiated by the vagueness
 and variety of his claims and the desultory nature of his tech­
54


===== PDF PAGE 055 =====

                                        A Mirror for the Brain
nique. He was indeed a surprisingly unscientific scientist, as
personal acquaintance with him later confirmed.
   The first occasion on which the possibilities of clinical elec­
troencephalography were discussed in England was quite an
informal one. It was in the old Central Pathological Laboratory
at the Maudsley Hospital in London, in 1929. The team there
under Professor Golla were in some difficulty about electrical
apparatus; they were trying to get some records of the ‘Berger
rhythm’, using amplifiers with an old galvanometer that fused
every time they switched on the current. Golla was anxious
to use the Matthews oscillograph, then the last word in robust
accuracy, to measure peripheral and central conduction times.
I was still working at Cambridge under the watchful eye of
Adrian and Matthews and was pleased to introduce this novelty
to him and at the same time, with undergraduate superiority,
put him right on a few other points. When, at lunch around
the laboratory table, he referred to the recent publication of
Berger’s claims, I readily declared that anybody could record
a wobbly line, it was a string of artefacts, even if there
were anything significant in it there was nothing you could
measure, and so on. Golla agreed with milder scepticism,
but added: ‘If this new apparatus is as good as you say, it
should be easy to find out whether Berger’s rhythm is only
artefact; and if it isn’t, the frequency seems remarkably con­
stant; surely one could measure that quite accurately.’ And he
surmised that there would be variations of the rhythm in
disease.
   Cambridge still could not accept the brain as a proper study
for the physiologist. The wobbly line did not convince us or
anybody else at that time. Berger’s ‘elektrenkephalograms’ were
also completely disregarded. His entirely original and pains­
taking work received little recognition until in May 1934,
Adrian and Matthews gave the first convincing demonstration
of the ‘Berger rhythm’ to an English audience, a meeting of
the Physiological Society at Cambridge.
   Meanwhile, Golla was reorganizing his laboratory and his
confidence in the possibilities of the Berger method was
growing. When he invited me to join his research team as
                                                               55


===== PDF PAGE 056 =====

The Living Brain
physiologist at the Central Pathological Laboratory, my first
task was to visit the German laboratories, including particularly
that of Hans Berger.
   Berger, in 1935, was not regarded by his associates as in the
front rank of German psychiatrists, having rather the reputa­
tion of being a crank. He seemed to me to be a modest and
dignified person, full of good humour, and as unperturbed by
lack of recognition as he was later by the fame it eventually
brought him. But he had one fatal weakness: he was completely
ignorant of the technical and physical basis of his method. He
knew nothing about mechanics or electricity. This handicap
made it impossible for him to correct serious shortcomings in
his experiments. His method was a simple adaptation of the
electrocardiographic technique by which the electrical impulses
generated by the heart are recorded. At first he inserted silver
wires under the subject’s scalp; later he used silver foil bound
to the head with a rubber bandage. Nearly always he put one
electrode over the forehead and one over the back of the head;
leads were taken from these to an Edelmann galvanometer, a
light and sensitive ‘string’ type of instrument, and records were
taken by an assistant photographer. A potential change of
one ten-thousandth of a volt - a very modest sensitivity by
present standards - could just be detected by this apparatus.
Each record laboriously produced was equivalent to that of two
or three seconds of modern continuous pen recording. The line
did show a wobble at about ten cycles per second. (See Figure
3.) He had lately acquired a valve amplifier to drive his gal­
vanometer and his pride and pleasure in the sweeping excur­
sions of line obtained by its use were endearing.
   Berger carried the matter as far as his technical handicap
permitted. He had observed that the larger and more regular
rhythms tended to stop when the subject opened his eyes or
solved some problem in mental arithmetic. This was confirmed
by Adrian and Matthews with leads from electrodes on Adrian’s
head attached to a Matthews amplifier and ink-writing oscillo­
graph. This superior apparatus, and a more careful location
of electrodes, enabled them to go a step further and prove that
the ten cycles per second rhythm arises in the visual association
56


===== PDF PAGE 057 =====

                                                      Figure 3
                       ‘The line did show a wobble at about ten cycles per second.’
     (а) A tracing from one of Berger’s earliest records.




57
     (б) Record from a modern laboratory showing consistency of automatic analysis over ten-second periods.


===== PDF PAGE 058 =====

The Living Brain
areas in the occiput and not, as Berger supposed, from the
whole brain.
   Only some years later was it realized what an important step
this was. Its significance could not be recognized while so little
was known about the components of the ‘wobbly line’, the
electroencephalogram or, abbreviated, eeg. Unavoidably, at
the time, the significance of the salient character of the normal
eeg was overlooked; it was found, in Adrian’s phrase, ‘dis­

appointingly constant’. The attention of many early workers
in electroencephalography therefore turned from normal re­
search to the study of nervous disease. In immediate rewards
this has always been a rich field. In this instance, a surprising
state was soon reached wherein what might be called the elec­
tropathy of the brain was further advanced than its electro­
physiology.
   In the pathological laboratory, Golla’s earlier surmise, that
there would be variations of the rhythmic oscillation in disease,
was soon verified. A technique was developed there by which
the central point of the disturbance in the tissue could be
accurately determined. For surgery, the immediate result of
perfecting this technique was important; it made possible the
location of tumours, brain injuries, or other physical damage
to the brain. It was helpful in many head cases during the war
as well as in daily surgical practice.
   The study of epilepsy and mental disorders also began to
occupy the attention of many eeg workers. The difficulties
encountered in these subjects threw into prominent relief the
essential complexity of the problem as compared with those of
classical physiology. The hope of isolating single functions had
now been abandoned; those who entered this field were com­
mitted to studying the brain as a whole organ and through it
the body as a whole organism. They were therefore forced to
multiply their sources of information.
   It is now the general eeg practice, not only for clinical
purposes, but in research, to use of number of electrodes simul­
taneously, indeed as many as possible and convenient. The
standard make of eeg recorder has eight channels. Eight pens
are simultaneously tracing lines in which the recordist, after
58


===== PDF PAGE 059 =====

                                       A Mirror for the Brain
long experience, can recognize the main components of a com­
plex graph. The graphs can also be automatically analysed into
their component frequencies. A most satisfactory method of
watching the electrical changes in all the main areas, as in a
moving picture, a much more informative convention than the
drawing of lines, has been devised at the Burden Neurological
Institute. This will be described after a simple explanation of
what is meant by the rhythmic composition of the normal eeo;
for its nature, rather than the methods of recording and
analysing it, is of first importance for understanding what
follows.
   If you move a pencil amply but regularly up and down on a
paper that is being drawn steadily from right to left, the result
will be a regular series of curves. If at the same time the paper
is moving up and down, another series of curves will be added
to the line drawn. If the table is shaking, the vibration will be
added to the line as a ripple. There will then be three com­
ponents integrated in the one wavy line, which will begin to
look something like an eeo record. The line gives a coded or
conventional record of the various frequencies and amplitudes
of different physical movements. In similar coded or integrated
fashion the eeg line reports the frequencies and amplitudes of
the electrical changes in the different parts of the brain tapped
by the electrodes on the scalp, their minute currents being re­
layed by an amplifier to the oscillograph which activates the
pens.
   All eeg records contain many more components than this;
some may show as many as twenty or thirty at a time in sig­
nificant sizes. Actually there may be tens of thousands of
impulses woven together in such a manner that only the grosser
combinations are discernible.
   A compound curve is of course more easily put together than
taken apart. (See Figure 4.) The adequate analysis of a few
inches of eeg records would require the painstaking computa­
tion of a mathematician - it might take him a week or so. The
modern automatic analyser in use in most laboratories writes
out the values of twenty-four components every ten seconds, as
well as any averaging needed over longer periods.
                                                              59


===== PDF PAGE 060 =====

The Living Brain
  The electrical changes which give rise to the alternating
currents of variable frequency and amplitude thus recorded
arise in the cells of the brain itself; there is no question of any
other power supply. The brain must be pictured as a vast
aggregation of electrical cells, as numerous as the stars of the
Galaxy, some ten thousand million of them, through which
surge the restless tides of our electrical being relatively thou-




          '^wvnaaaaAAAAAAAAA/VVVW
          ------------------------------------\^aaAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA/\

     ‘a




                               Figure 4
            ‘A compound curve is more easily put together
                        than taken apart.’
(a) A compound curve in which the three components can be detected by
    visual inspection, ratios 1:2 and 2:3.
(b) The three components (ratios 8 :9, 9:10) of this compound curve can­
    not be determined at sight. The bottom line shows their frequencies
    automatically recorded every ten seconds. Note the accidental similar­
    ity of this curve to the eeg record of alpha rhythms in Figure 3 (6).
60


===== PDF PAGE 061 =====

                                        A Mirror for the Brain
sands of times more potent than the force of gravity. It is when
a million or so of these cells repeatedly fire together that the
rhythm of their discharge becomes measurable in frequency
and amplitude.
   What makes these million cells act together - or indeed what
causes a single cell to discharge - is not known. We are still
a long way from any explanation of these basic mechanics of
the brain. Future research may well carry us, as it has carried
the physicist in his attempt to understand the composition of
our atomic being, into vistas of ever-increasing enchantment
but describable only in the convention of mathematical lan­
guage. Today, as we travel from one fresh vista to another, the
propriety of the language we use, the convention we adopt,
becomes increasingly important. Arithmetic is an adequate lan­
guage for describing the height and time of the tides, but if we
want to predict their rise and fall we have to use a different
language, an algebra, with its special notation and theorems.
In similar fashion, the electrical waves and tides in the brain
can be described adequately by counting, by arithmetic; but
there are many unknown quantities when we come to the more
ambitious purposes of understanding and predicting brain be­
haviour - many x's and y’s; so it will have to have its algebra.
The word is forbidding to some people; but, after all, it means
no more than ‘the putting together of broken pieces’.
   eeg records may be considered, then, as the bits and pieces

of a mirror for the brain, itself speculum speculorum. They
must be carefully sorted before even trying to fit them together
with bits from other sources. Their information comes as a
conventional message, coded. You may crack the code, but that
does not imply that the information will necessarily be of high
significance. Supposing, for instance, you pick up a coded
message which you think may be about a momentous political
secret. In the first stage of decoding it you might ascertain that
the order of frequency of the letters was ETAONl. This does
not sound very useful information; but reference to the letter-
frequency tables would assure you at least that it was a message
in English and possibly intelligible. Likewise, we watch the
frequencies as well as the amplitude and origin of the brain
                                                               61


===== PDF PAGE 062 =====

The Living Brain
rhythms, knowing that many earnest seekers for the truth have
spent lifetimes trying to decipher what they thought were real
messages, only to find that their horoscopes and alembics con­
tained gibberish. The scientist is used to such hazards of re­
search; it is only the ignorant and superstitious who regard him,
or think he regards himself, as a magician or priest who is right
about everything all the time.
   Brain research has just about reached the stage where the
letter frequencies of the code indicate intelligibility and their
grouping significance. But there is this complication. The
ordinary coded message is a sequence in time; events in the
brain are not a single sequence in time - they occur in three-
dimensional space, in that one bit of space which is more
crowded with events than any other we can conceive. We may
tap a greater number of sectors of the brain and set more pens
scribbling; but the effect of this will only be to multiply the
number of code signals, to the increasing embarrassment of the
observer, unless the order and interrelation of the signals can
be clarified and emphasized. Redundancy is already a serious
problem of the laboratory.
   The function of a nervous system is to receive, correlate,
store, and generate many signals. A human brain is a mecha­
nism not only far more intricate than any other but one that
has a long individual history. To study such a problem in terms
of frequency and amplitude as a limited function of time - in
wavy lines - is at the best over-simplification. And the re­
dundancy is indeed enormous. Information at the rate of about
3,600 amplitudes per minute may be coming through each of
the eight channels during the average recording period of
twenty minutes; so the total information in a routine record
may be represented by more than half a million numbers; yet
the usual description of a record consists only of a few sen­
tences. Only rarely does an observer use more than one-
hundredth of one per cent of the available information.
   ‘What’s in the brain, that ink may character ... ?’
   For combining greater clarity with greater economy, many
elaborations of methods have been adopted in clinic and
laboratory. They still do not overcome the fundamental em­
62


===== PDF PAGE 063 =====

                                        A Mirror for the Brain
barrassment of redundancy and the error of over-simplification,
both due to the limitations of a time scale. A promising alterna­
tive is a machine that draws a snapshot map instead of a long
history, projecting the electrical data visually on a spatial co­
ordinate system which can be laid out so as to represent a
single map or model of the head. This moving panorama of the
brain rhythms does approximate to Sherrington's ‘enchanted
loom where millions of flashing shuttles weave a dissolving
pattern, always a meaningful pattern though never an abiding
one’.
   We have called the apparatus which achieves this sort of
effect at the Burden Institute a toposcope, by reason of its dis­
play of topographic detail. The equipment was developed by
Harold Shipton, whose imaginative engineering transformed
the early models from entertainment to education. Two of its
twenty-four channels are for monitoring the stimuli; the others,
instead of being connected with pens, lead the electrical
activity of the brain tapped by the electrodes for display on the
screens of small cathode-ray tubes. So instead of wavy lines on
a moving paper, the observer sees, to quote Sherrington again,
‘a sparkling field of rhythmic flashing points with trains of
travelling sparks hurrying hither and thither’. Assembled in the
display console, twenty-two of the tubes give a kind of Mer­
cator’s projection of the brain. Frequency, phase, and time
relations of the rhythms are shown in what at first appears to
be a completely bewildering variety of patterns in each tube
and in their ensemble. Then, as the practised eye gains familiar­
ity with the scene, many details of brain activity are seen for
the first time. A conventional pen machine is simultaneously at
the disposal of the observer, synchronized so that, by turning
a switch, a written record of the activity seen in any five of the
tubes can be obtained. Another attachment is a camera with
which at the same time permanent snapshot records of the
display can be obtained.
   Thus, from Berger’s crude galvanometer to this elaborate
apparatus requiring a whole room of its own, electroencephalo­
graphy has progressed from a technique to a science. Its clinical
benefits, by-products of free research, are acknowledged; they
                                                               63


===== PDF PAGE 064 =====

The Living Brain
can be gauged by the vast multiplication of eeg laboratories.
From Berger’s lone clinic have sprung several hundred eeo
centres - more than fifty in England alone. Literally millions
of yards of paper have been covered with frantic scribblings.
In every civilized country there is a special learned society
devoted to the discussion of the records and to disputation on
technique and theory. These societies are banded together in an
International Federation, which publishes a quarterly Journal
and organizes international congresses.
  For a science born, as it were, bastard and neglected in in­
fancy, this is a long way to have travelled in its first quarter of
a century. If it is to provide the mirror which the brain requires
to see itself steadily and whole, there is still a long road ahead.
The following chapters give the prospect as seen from the
present milestone, assuming that such studies are allowed to
continue. Looking back, we realize that the present scale of
work as compared with previous physiological research is
elaborate and expensive. But our annual cost of conducting
planned investigations of a fundamental nature into man’s
supreme faculties, is less than half that of one medium tank,
and the money spent on brain research in all England is barely
one-tenth of one per cent of the cost of the national mental
health services.


===== PDF PAGE 065 =====

      3
The Significance of Pattern
      Out of the earth to rest or range
      Perpetual in perpetual change.
      The unknown passing through the strange.
                         John Masefield




The only important assertion about the working of the human
brain which has been discussed so far is that, in the records of
its electrical activity, among their myriad patterns are found a
few which seem to be meaningful. This chapter will go a step
further; we shall begin to inquire into the special significance
which we think may be assigned to some of these patterns.
So before taking this very long step, it may be well to do two
things - to clarify our outlook as strange horizons come into
view, and to establish the basic axiom, that where there is
pattern there is significance.
   The main subject throughout will be the physical counterparts
of mental events. It is common experience that wherever these
are discussed two attitudes toward them usually appear, con­
trasted, often controversial, a revival of the old dispute about
mind and matter, for which each generation finds new slogans.
On the one hand, some people regard these mental processes
as straightforward results of complex nerve activity coupled to
a complex environment; they consequently declare that human
reason is easily imitated and even surpassed by electronic
devices. They may go further, and suggest that it is only a
question of careful observation and patience, of technical re­
finement, before we can observe as electrical discharges the
thoughts of our own brains.
   On the other hand, preconceptions aside, and considering
only the physical intricacy of the brain, its vast aggregate of
cell units, the still vaster astronomical number required to
   L.B.-3                                                    65


===== PDF PAGE 066 =====

The Living Brain
express their combinations and permutations, the boundless
variety of human thought and imagination - considering only
these factors of consciousness and personality, one may well
question how, or even whether, such matters can ever be
included in a philosophy of reason. They may seem to belong
to another ‘universe of discourse’, wholly inaccessible to our
technical probing, not merely because, like the other side of the
moon, they happen to be facing the other way, but because,
like a solid to an inhabitant of Flatland, they exist in a dimen­
sion which cannot by its nature be indicated on our measuring
instruments.
   Psychiatrists recognize these opposites in their patients and
political theorists in historical events. One should appreciate
also that the conflict is not only between individuals, but in
one individual from time to time; as well as controversy there
is vacillation. A general reason why this is so - why the brain-
mind relation is a natural subject of controversy and vacilla­
tion - may be noted. Mental functions are active adaptations,
but past studies of the brain have nearly always been static.
The psychologist, rushing in, asked how the mind works while
the physiologist too modestly was still asking what the brain
is. The situation has changed in these ten years, but the physio­
logist today, dealing with an adapting mechanism, knows that
he will not get exactly the same answer twice to his continuous
questioning and that no demonstrable truth is both absolute
and general.
   So he must reject the alternatives of the controversy. For
him neither a glib materialistic fantasy of the all-knowing, nor
defeatism of reason in evasion of the difficulties presented by
the complexity of the subject. There will be plenty of reason,
 on the one hand, for being modest about what has been dis­
covered; every discovery leads to new horizons of the unknown.
 And as for the complexity, that is only the background of life
itself. Foremost here will be the discovery of simplicity and
 parsimony even in the richest of life’s manifestations.
   Consider then the significance of pattern. So much of brain
 physiology rests on this conception that it must be thoroughly
 understood before going further.lt would be grossly misleading,
66


===== PDF PAGE 067 =====

                                     The Significance of Pattern
for instance, to let it be thought, as loose talk about ‘brain
waves’ has suggested, that there is any reason to suppose a
priori that the recorded patterns of brain activity have any
mental significance. Indeed the reverse is the case; the alpha
rhythms, most prominent of all those patterns, are most regular
in their formation when the mental activity is least.
   ‘Order is Heav’n’s first law,’ wrote Pope. Pattern is the
raw material of order. It is not always so regarded, nor even
universally recognized as significant. We have a way of import­
ing words for one purpose and then using them for another
and quite different one, to the glory of English and the con­
fusion of foreigners. Pattern is one of them. The word came
from Italy by way of France - pater, patron', but pattern is
something which cannot be named in Rome or Paris, for which
there is no word in the Romance languages. Their dictionaries
can only guess at it with words strictly meaning model, design,
sample, exemplar, and so forth, as misleading as precision could
be. Perhaps they had no need of such a word, so imbued was
the Latin tradition with pattern; the Romans could make
regular divisions of their daylight regardless of its duration, as
if the seasonal variations were, like the tides of their sea,
negligible, and the man-made pattern of a day the whole matter.
For us, creatures of the glacial periphery, there was no escaping
the majestic variations of light and darkness, incalculable but
meaningful rhythm. The extravagances of its millennial flicker
are imprinted in our nature; witness the brilliant aberrations
of Baltic mentality where supermen loom in the twilight of
the gods.
   Regular or irregular, the alternation of day and night was
probably the first pattern in time that impressed the human
brain, accentuated by the pre-thermostasis imposition of sleep.
There would be early recognition, too, of the patterned calls of
animals, the warning sequence of a coming storm, memorable
cries of defiance or distress; finally, most precious of all patterns
in time, speech. Long before this, however, observation and
memory of patterns in space would be highly developed, though
limited in practice to two dimensions - the relative position of
places, spoors, waterholes, caves. Early in our history we must
                                                                  67


===== PDF PAGE 068 =====

The Living Brain
have found safety and satisfaction in remembering and repro­
ducing simple patterns.
   Pattern, then, may be defined as any sequence of events in
time, or any set of objects in space, distinguishable from or
comparable with another sequence or set. The first significant
attribute of a pattern is that you can remember it and compare
it with another pattern. This is what distinguishes it from
random events or chaos. For the notion of random - another
imported word lost to the Romance languages - implies that
disorder is beyond comparison; you cannot remember chaos or
compare one chaos with another; there is no plural of the word.
Pattern is a quality of familiar things and familiar things are
comforting things. It is much nearer the truth to say that man
abhors chaos than that nature abhors a vacuum. Man seeks
patterns for his comfort and, in English at least, can boast him­
self a pattern-making animal.
   Broadly speaking one may say that the sciences derive from
pattern-seeking, the arts from pattern-making, though there is
a much more intimate relation between the seeking and making
of patterns than this would suggest. It is worth recalling some
other instances of pattern-seeking as the origin of a science.
   When man first looked at the night sky from the nursery
window of the race, he found patterns in the disorderly array
of the stars, and his picturesque constellations are still useful
to the astronomer, the beginning of his science. Geometry,
the first abstract science, arose from the need for the seasonal
restoration in the Nile Valley of the patterns of property.
Gravitational astronomy, as well as much else, grew from
Newton’s perception of a pattern in the mutual relations of
physical bodies. Botany rests on the pattern of plant relations
which Linnaeus transformed into a classification. Biologists are
still trying to fill in and complete the pattern of species Darwin
found in the animal world. In later times, Mendel discovered
the pattern of heredity, the science of genetics. Clerk Maxwell,
unrecognized a hundred years ago except as a competent
mathematician, endowed this generation with his prophetic
enunciation of the patterns of electrical forces without know­
ledge of which there would be no electronics.
68


===== PDF PAGE 069 =====

                                    The Significance of Pattern
   Knowing well this eagerness to discern and the temptation
to imagine pattern, the French father of physiology, Claude
Bernard, deprived of this particular word, resisted and decried
adherence to any ‘system’. A scientist, he warned, should
realize that ‘systems do not exist in nature but only in men’s
minds’. The paradox that ‘philosophy should not be system­
atic’ was snatched by Bernard’s compatriot Bergson sixty years
later as a cornerstone of his philosophy; the irony of such an
inveterate pattern-seeker as Bernard concluding that either
men’s minds were outside nature or nature is chaotic, could not
have been more nicely pointed.
   Finally, among these Fathers of Science, Berger has a curious
position as a candid seeker for pattern in the electrical activity
of his brain, audaciously neglecting Bernard’s assertions that he
should seek it only in his mind.
   Without pattern-making also, however, none of these brill­
iant perceptions of pattern would have been possible, let alone
communicable. In every case there were only fractional pieces
of information available, with many other bits of unknown
quantities, as in the illustration of the cryptographic nature of
eeg records in the preceding chapter. The putting together of

these broken bits of information and questions, of known and
unknown quantities, was made possible in the first instance by
the Arab invention of patterns in which visible and invisible
pieces could be logically manipulated, assembled, equated,
evaluated - in a word, algebra. Classical physiology, as we have
seen, tolerated only one single unknown quantity in its equa­
tions - in any experiment there could be only one thing at a
time under investigation. This was arithmetical physiology: a
single number was extracted from a known sequence, exam­
ined, altered, replaced, and the effect on the sequence noted.
The eeg pattern is never simple or singular. We cannot extract
one independent variable in the classical manner; we have to
deal with the interaction of many unknowns and variables,
all the time. We have to deal with the rhythms algebraically.
   In practice, this implies that not one but many - as many as
possible - observations must be made at once and compared
with one another, and that whenever possible a simple known
                                                               69


===== PDF PAGE 070 =====

The Living Brain
variable should be used to modify the several complex un­
knowns so that their tendencies and interdependence can be
assessed. This is an operation analogous to the solution of
simultaneous equations; its practical side will be described in
detail when discussing the purposes and effects of flicker stimu­
lation. We must first consider the main varieties of spontaneous
pattern observed and how they reach the brain from the diff­
erent sense organs.
   The anatomy and minute structure of the nervous system is
so intricate, and it is so well described elsewhere, that the reader
who must envisage a structure in order to imagine a function
would do well to consult one of the works listed in the biblio­
graphy. Physiologists find convenient a division of the whole
nervous system into two main parts, the sensory, receptor, or
afferent mechanisms, and the motor, effector, or efferent ones.
On the sensory side are including the sense organs, the sensory
nerve trunks, each containing myriads of minute nerve fibres,
the extension relays of these within the spinal cord and, ter­
minating at the surface of the back half of the brain, the
sensory cortex. On the other side of the divide is the motor
cortex, in the front part of the brain, the motor nerves and the
muscles and glands which act upon the body itself or upon the
outside world. There is here a complete circuit of information
and effect: event, receptor, nerve, brain, brain, nerve, effector,
event. So dramatic are the properties of such a circuit that for
many years physiologists were content to study its simplest
functions. Anatomists, too, sought tirelessly for the structural
characters which were expected to underly and to mirror the
simple functional pattern outlined by experiment. But, just as
the discredited phrenologists - who filched a good name from
the science we are introducing - found too much meaning in
their bumps, so some microscopists and, it must be confessed,
electrophysiologists, saw system in the brain where others
found none, and mistook the constriction of their methods for
consistency in their material.
   It is true that certain parts of the brain have a regular and
recognizable miscroscopic appearance and respond in a fairly
predictable fashion when stimulated electrically, and when
70


===== PDF PAGE 071 =====

                                    The Significance of Pattern
 diseased or damaged they are associated with certain symptom­
 atic or diagnostic signs or symptoms. But the exceptions to
 these rules are so numerous and their experimental foundation
 is so tenuous, that there is now a tendency to support an entirely
 ‘holistic’ view of brain function, to suppose that ail parts are
engaged in any sense or any action, and that the location of
function is more a probability than a place. In such a system,
 pattern there still must be, but not a pattern that can be recog­
nized at a glance or described in a phrase. That we can conceive
 of it at all is due to the obscure workings of the brain regions
 which yield least to experimental probing, the association areas,
sometimes called ‘silent’ because their oracles are dumb when
threatened by the experimental intruder. These regions make
 up the greater part of the human brain and are closely linked
with the receiving areas where impulses from the receptors
most commonly arrive.
    The sensory reception areas or departments, we have sug­
gested, are more like leaseholds than freeholds of the senses, so
vagrant are the functions of the brain. These sensory systems,
before anyone knew how they worked, used to be compared
with telephone exchanges, simply because messages were
known to travel between the end organs and the brain. Taste,
least important of the senses, could then be conveniently
described as a local exchange with very few outside wires and
only four numbers of its own - sweet, sour, bitter, and salt. But
the analogy is just about as misleading as it could be. This must
be explained.
    In a telephone system the meaning of a message received
depends on the sender; in a sensory system the meaning de­
pends on the receiver. When nerve impulses travel from a sense
organ, it is their destination on the cortex which determines, in
the first place, the character of the sensation, not the sense
organ from which they come. If, when you get a number on
the telephone, you give a message, the message remains the
same, even if you give it to a wrong number. The result of such
an error in the brain is very different Supposing some vinegar
comes in contact with one of the sensitive end organs of taste
in the tip of your tongue and ‘gets a wrong number’ - that is.
                                                                71


===== PDF PAGE 072 =====

The Living Brain
say, supposing the nerve fibre conducting the impulse provoked
by the vinegar, instead of connecting with its proper reception
area, becomes in some way cut and grafted on to a nerve fibre
leading from the ear to the brain - what do you think you
would taste? You would taste nothing. You would hear a very
loud and startling noise. Every time the nerve end in your
tongue was stimulated you would have a similar hallucination.
If, instead, one auditory nerve were in this way misconnected
with an optic nerve, when you heard music you would see
visions. This is the mechanistic basis of hallucination. Such
accidents are unlikely to occur in the peripheral nerves, where
cross-talk is avoided by special anatomical arrangements, but
they do occur within the brain itself.
    The matter is not, of course, quite as simple as here outlined;
nor will the reader look for a complete account of the mech­
 anisms of the senses in what follows. But it seems to be a safe
generalization, about all the senses, to say that what we usually
speak of as the ‘quality’ of a sensation depends upon the parts
of the brain reached by the nerve impulses involved, and that
 the intensity of this sensation depends on the frequency of the
 impulses.
    Smell, the better part of taste, is more interesting because it
 has a greater variety of sensations and many more associative
 links with the activity patterns of the brain and the emotions.
 The reactions of the olfactory organ to molecules which have a
 distinctive smell can be observed as impulses travelling from it
 to the brain. Their pattern in an eeg record shows that fre­
 quency of impulse increases with intensity of excitation. Just
 how the brain discriminates between different smells is not so
 clear. Adrian, who led exploration in this field, found slight
 but distinct difference in the sensitivity of different receptors
 to different kinds of smell, and indications that the impulses
 from the olfactory organ are relayed from specialized receiving
 areas to the main sensory receiving area for the nose and mouth
 on the lateral surface of the cerebral cortex. Thus it is not yet
 clear whether the whole pattern of smell is relayed to one part
 of the cortex or if the different components of it go to different
 parts and are reassembled with discrimination at a later stage.
72


===== PDF PAGE 073 =====

                                    The Significance of Pattern
   Touch takes up a considerable area in what may be described
as a much folded and wavering chart in the cortex. This is to
be expected, considering the extent of discrimination which is
required for us to know where a tactile message originates.
All the organs and parts of the body are represented on the
chart, not in their visible proportions but according to the
neural equipment and importance of each part - mouth larger
than the cheeks, fingers larger than the arms, and so forth. The
web of patterns woven by the many end organs on this shim­
mering abstract of our flesh is so intricately entangled that it
may be some time before any satisfactory study of them will be
made. Nor is the complexity quantitative only.
   The sense of touch is the most vital of the senses if only
because of its major role in reproduction. And here we come
upon a limitation of the brain’s emancipation, in which some
physiological support for Freud’s thesis may be found regard­
ing the intrusive mental character of sex. The operational
isolation of sexual function is peculiar. Intercourse and pro­
creation are not necessarily conscious acts; nor are they
naturally effected on the direct initiative of the higher centres;
yet there is constant access for sensory stimuli from the organs
to the brain. In this the brain is rather like an intelligence unit
in the field which can receive information but cannot transmit
any tactical orders. Strategy, of course, is another matter, and
so is discipline and art. Many civilized peoples have sought to
endow sex with a ritual. This has at least an effect of providing
a pattern of sex behaviour for the brain. Physiologically con­
sidered, some special art or discipline of this kind would be
preferable to the mild but unceasing stimulus of the popular
arts of today, excitatory without being formative. Heaven only
knows what mutations this titillation may in time promote,
neither so lordly as those of the amphibia nor so decorative as
those of the plants. Puritan and sensualist agree that the
pleasures of touch, unguided by any art of their own, are nasty,
brutish, and short.
   In this sector something might be learnt from the blind about
the intelligent uses, artistic as well as utilitarian, of the sense
 of touch. The person who obtains an image of a spatial object
                                                                73


===== PDF PAGE 074 =====

The Living Brain
by touching it, or scans the plastic symbol of a verbal code,
adds to the transformations of temporal and spatial pattern,
and does so with a refinement and concentration which cannot
fail to be significant. In most people the sense of touch and
feeling is rudimentary, ambiguous, inconsistent, and subord­
inate.
   Pain is often erroneously regarded as an unpleasant exag­
geration of the sense of touch. In fact it is more like a sixth
sense. It has its own interior and exterior end organs and its
exclusive nerve connexions. Messages pass along them at a
much slower pace than those on the touch and other sensory
systems. The White Queen was wiser than Alice thought when
she screamed before she was hurt instead of after. That is what,
in effect, we always do. If you step on a tack, you jump first,
and only later feel the pain of it. The reflex signals travel there
and back in less time than it takes for the sensation of pain to
reach the brain. Try it. You’ll be surprised.
   Patterns of hearing are second in interest only to those of
the eye. Any sound - be it a single note or many simultaneous
notes that make mere noise or combine in a musical chord -
is an event in time. The spatial aspect of a chord is only sym­
bolical. A note must have a minimum duration; it must last
long enough for its wave-pattern to repeat, like that of wall­
paper, for identification. The lower the note, the longer the
duration must be; a chord too briefly sounded loses its bass.
And the pattern of sound with which ear and brain have to deal
has other qualities beside duration or rhythm; pitch, timbre,
and amplitude must also be identified. But before a pattern of
 sound reaching the ear can be transmitted for spatial distribu­
tion on the cortex, its components must be identified. The
chord must be analysed.
   This is done by the cochlea, a small coiled instrument of the
 inner ear, not to be confused with the comparatively unimport­
 ant ear-drum. The coiled tubes in the cochlea are less than an
 inch long, but they are so interconnected that the fluid in dif­
 ferent parts of them vibrates in response to every pitch of
 audible tone or harmonic. Vibrations of a given frequency
 activate one section of the tube to which a responsive mem­
74


===== PDF PAGE 075 =====

                                    The Significance of Pattern
brane is attached, and from this section of the tube a nerve
fibre transmits a signal to a point on the reception area of the
cortex. Thus the pitch, the wave frequency of a note, is con­
verted into a single pin-point for spatial discrimination, as are
also any harmonics of its timbre. Its characterization by wave-
frequency ceases at the cochlea. What is indicated by the
frequency of the nerve impulses is the amplitude or volume of
the note; the louder the sound, the more rapidly the impulse is
repeated.
   There will be more to say later about the sensitivity of the
sleeping brain to sound, as compared with light or any other
sensation. Music is proverbially connected with the emotions
and provides a thousand examples, among the daily patterns
of our lives, that familiar things are comforting things. Some
rhythms invigorate the normal activity of the brain; others
may suspend or dissipate it. The objection to constant broadcast
streams of light music is not that the music is light but that it
is hypnotic and its associations maintain a constant pattern of
mild titillation.
   The reader can test the brain’s suggestibility and its affinity
to rhythm. Listen to the regular ticking of a clock, and note
how long it takes for the unaccented sequence to resolve itself
into groups of two, three, or four ticks. This affinity to rhythm,
the close correlation between external patterns of sound and
those within the brain, suggests one reason why loss of hearing,
for which no other sense can deputize, is so hard to bear; an­
other reason may well be that the ears have no natural ex­
perience of deafness, nor any mechanism for temporarily
excluding the audible world, as darkness or closing the eyes
makes us familiar with a transient blindness.
   The pre-eminence of vision is supported by organs of
supreme elaboration and sensitivity, and by the impressive
proportion of the activity of the brain which is devoted to that
sense. It is here that the brain’s emancipation from the menial
services of the senses becomes most apparent. All the intricate
subsidiary operations of vision have been relegated to the lower
centres. The neural situation may be compared with that of a
film studio. The director is not concerned with the details of
                                                               75


===== PDF PAGE 076 =====

The Living Brain
operation of the cameras; focus, aperture, exposure - these are
expertly attended to without orders from him; but their posi­
tioning and aiming are a great part of his executive skill, and
the choice of set or location and working hours is under his
authority. He himself is under no compulsion to note what is
being taken. How often in our own experience he simply does
not see what we are looking at! Seen by him or not, the film is
shown in the projection chamber; the picture reaches the pro­
jection area of the cortex. Seen or unseen, it goes to the
archives; the whole thing, from beginning to end, may be avail­
able in the mysterious cabinet of the memory, long after we
have, unreminded, forgotten all about it.
   The analogy of photography breaks down, however, when
we come to look at the mechanism of vision. To illustrate the
difference, let us consider what happens when we look at the
most simple scene, a scene in which all the details remain the
same for a long time, a true space pattern, say a landscape. You
may think that you can take in the whole of a static scene of
this kind at a single glance, as a camera does, without moving
your eyes. But that is not how the eyes work. An instantaneous
glance will not allow your retina to show you an image like
that obtained by a camera. The most your retina will obtain
 from a swift single glimpse will be a very small clear centre in
 the midst of a large field of quite indistinguishable details. The
 explanation of this is simple. It is true that the lens of the eye
 is like that of a cheap camera, but the retina on which the image
 is projected is quite unlike a photographic plate or film in one
 important respect. The whole area of a photographic film has a
 uniform grain; the chemically sensitive specks of matter com­
 posing it are equi-distant and equi-sensitive. The surface of the
 retina is not uniform in this way. Only a minute patch, about
 one-third of a millimetre wide, in the centre of the retina, has
 a grain fine enough to receive and transmit an image in great
 detail. This patch contains special light-sensitive cells or cones
 with separate individual nerve fibres leading to the brain.
 Around this patch are groups of other cones, and the more
 sensitive but sparser and less discriminating rods, which have
 a common nerve fibre only for each bunch as their link with
76


===== PDF PAGE 077 =====

                                    The Significance of Pattern
the brain. This arrangement therefore provides a high capacity
for perception of detail in the very limited centre of the scene
to which the eye is directed, with very poor discrimination but
greater sensitivity elsewhere.
   The reader can test the difference between the central and
surrounding acuity of the eye without putting down this book.
Turn to a new page, and as you do so fix your gaze immediately
and steadily on the first word you pick out in the centre of the
page. If the eyes are not moved at all it will be found that only
one other word or so can be read; all the rest of the page, though
visible, will be indistinct and quite unreadable. It is not just a
matter of focus. To read this page of print you are scanning it,
line by line, your eyes are moving so as to bring the words in
sequence into the centre of the field; images of them are then
received on the one minute patch of the retina which has fine
enough grain to resolve the detail for recognition.
   The proportion of the visual field which can receive a pre­
cision image is only about one-hundredth of the whole. The
angle subtended by the minute patch is about two degrees out
of 180, the visible field being something more than a semi­
circle. So in order to view that landscape which you may have
thought you could take in at a single glance, you have to make
several hundred peeps and sweeps, requiring thousands of
coordinated eye movements to scan the scene. With the addi­
tional effort required for discrimination of colour and third
dimensional position, this sounds tiring. And physiologically it
is. For the nervous system, looking at a picture of a landscape
is vastly easier than looking at the landscape itself. The repro­
duction of a scene that in nature extends across half our field
of vision, reduced in size to subtend a smaller angle, say, ten
degrees, and flattened and shorn of irrelevant details, saves an
enormous amount of effort. The area to be scanned is reduced
to about one-hundredth of its natural size. No doubt the lessen­
ing of the strain has something to do with the particular pleas­
ure we feel in looking at a painting or a photograph.
   The next stage in the process of vision is the transfer of the
image on the retina to the projection area of the brain. This is
a section of the cortex not more than about two inches square,
                                                               77


===== PDF PAGE 078 =====

The Living Brain
tucked away in the back of the head. It is connected with the
retina by the nerve fibres of the rods and cones, about one
million of them comprising the optic nerve. The whole image
on the retina is transmitted at the same time to the cortex. What
the scanning of the eye does is to bring the different parts of
the scene in turn on to the macula, the minute discriminating
patch of the retina.
   Transmission of the image from-retina to cortex is continu­
ous, but the retina is not an entirely faithful transmitter. Every
image it receives persists for a tenth of a second. So if there is
a rapid succession of changing images, the after-effect of one
overlaps the succeeding one. It is this well-known phenomenon
of the persistence of vision that makes it difficult to see the
detail of rapid movement, but also makes a rapidly flickering
light seem continuous.
   It may be recalled that this overlapping effect is oddly con­
nected with horse-racing, and that the connexion had a result
of the most widespread and popular interest. For a long time it
was disputed whether a galloping horse ever has all its feet off
the ground at one time. The eye could not follow the move­
ments continuously, owing to persistence of vision; nor could it
stop to analyse them. To settle the issue, a succession of photo­
graphs was taken with very short intervals. This showed that
the horse was in fact airborne for a fraction of a second; but,
more important to this generation, it was found that when the
photographs were looked at in rapid succession there was an
illusion of a moving picture.
   The process of vision is not complete, however, when the
image reaches projection. Every sensation brought to the cortex
by the million nerve fibres from the retina must be made avail­
able for cognition to other parts of the brain. Obviously this is
a greater mechanical problem than the discrimination of the
limited number of signals of the other senses. A moment’s con­
sideration will also show that the provision of direct neural
communication for the million visual units of the cortex with
the rest of the ten thousand million units of the brain would
strain the housing capacity of the cranium. The number of
fibres would have to be of the order of 10s x 1010 or, to write
78


===== PDF PAGE 079 =====

                                  The Significance of Pattern
it out for the unmathematical, 10,000,000,000,000,000 fibres.
A house, let alone a human head, would not contain them.
   Chance provided a hint about a possible solution of this
problem, and the clue was followed in the laboratory with some
satisfaction. The interest of the trail invites resumption of a
narrative which was broken off at a point in the story of the
discovery of the brain where the next chapter may conveniently
begin.


===== PDF PAGE 080 =====

      4
Revelation by Flicker
      Between the conception
      And the creation
      Between the emotion
      And the response
      Falls the shadow.
               T. S. Eliot


Evolution from cell to cerebrum required some 2,000 mil­
lion years; the recognition of brain by brain came only after
several thousand years of intellectual maturity; the acceptance
of it as an organ proper to physiological study, in spite of its
formidable complexity, is recent. The next stage of its pro­
gressive revelations passes quickly through the narrow road in
which research inevitably found itself in war years, into the
open spaces of exploration, with a new experimental approach
to the peaks of thought and personality already showing above
the horizon.
   The Second World War was on us before we had time to make
much of a systematic survey of the vast field which Pavlov and
Berger had opened to our young physiological eyes. Four
phases of development in the study of the brain since their days
can be distinguished.
   1. The first period, from 1928 to 1935, was one of general
scepticism, neglect of Berger’s original observations, under­
valuation of Pavlov’s exploration, disregard of any possible
connexion between them. The technical devices o? the period
were so poor, and Berger’s data were so poorly presented, that
this cannot be regarded as surprising.
   2. The second phase began when Adrian and Matthews, by
 more careful experiment with better equipment, confirmed
Berger’s claims in general about ‘the alpha rhythm’. This put
the seal of academic approval on the study of the brain. At the
80


===== PDF PAGE 081 =====

                                           Revelation by Flicker
same time, Golla’s surmise, expressed in 1929, that changes in
the electrical rhythms of the brain would have diagnostic value,
was confirmed by a study of clinical and experimental material
at the Central Pathological Laboratory and the Maida Vale
Hospital. This brought identification of a different sort of




                            Figure 5
   .. The frequency of a rhythm is more significant than its
                         amplitude ..
Main types of brain rhythms. Records showing the principal wave­
                      forms found in eeqs
                (a) Delta - 0-5 to 3-5 cycles per second.
                (B) Theta -4     to 7 cycles per second.
                (c) Alpha - 8 to 13 cycles per second.
                (d) Higher Frequency (Beta) - 14 to 30 c/s.

                                                              81


===== PDF PAGE 082 =====

The Living Brain
electrical activity of immediate clinical and later research
importance. A good name for this discovery seemed to be delta
rhythm because of its association with disease, degeneration,
and death. And with defence; for the association of these slower
 rhythms with disease does not seem to be accidental, but rather
a sign of the mobilization of organized defence. This is the
activity by which, we found, the site of a brain tumour can be
located without inconvenience to the patient. It arises in regions
which are compressed or invaded by growths or distorted by
injury; but it is the normal and indeed dominant rhythm in
the first year of life and in sleep. (See Figure 5.)
   This clinical success for eeg, with other discoveries holding
 promise of breaking through some of the mysteries of epilepsy,
 was great enough to distract nearly all workers from the funda­
mental problems toward the close of this period. And this, in
one way, was fortunate - as a preparation for the technological
interregnum of war. Two other novelties of this period, electric
shock therapy and leucotomy, indicate also the radical change
of attitude to the brain that was taking place. Their main inter­
est to us here is their physical interference with personality, and
they will be discussed later in that connexion.
   3. The war period called for a rapid development of brain
technique as a clinical accessory and for the design and manu­
facture of better eeg equipment, the training of assistants, and
the formation of special societies - developments which prob­
ably would not have occurred until much later if physiological
research had been uppermost. There were two eeg laboratories
in the United Kingdom at the beginning, fifty at the end of the
war. The first National eeg Society was formed primarily to
make available our fund of knowledge to centres dealing with
military casualties. At the first meeting of this group, held
literally in the midst of the battle of London, criteria of elec­
trical abnormality were agreed on and a glossary of terms was
drawn up.
   But the taking and interpretation of eeg records is a delicate
and complicated task; it calls for something like the combined
training of radiographer, who studies for two years before
taking X-rays, and radiologist, who takes a long medical
82


===== PDF PAGE 083 =====

                                            Revelation by Flicker
course before assuming diagnostic responsibility. There is not,
it is true, the same physical danger in the one process as in the
other; the taking of an eeg is innocuous; but a wrong inter­
pretation of a record can be worse than burning. It was mainly
as a necessary aid in this situation that we developed at the
Burden Neurological Institute a device capable of decoding the
eeg records automatically, plainly displaying the frequencies

and amplitudes every ten seconds, a kind of wave analysis,
corresponding roughly to a Fourier Transform.
   With this apparatus the various electrical components, pre­
sent at the same time in any given area of the brain, are
automatically filtered out and displayed separately on the
record, rather as the colours in white light are separated and
projected by a prism. This greatly facilitates interpretation,
besides providing research with a powerful instrument. For
instance, one direct result of its use in 1943 was that we were
able to identify yet another rhythmic component, which we
named the theta rhythm; about this there will be much to say
when we approach the distant Everest peak of personality.
   4. The fourth and present stage of development began when
the end of the war brought release for fundamental research.
It is with the explorations and ventures of this period that the
rest of this book will be dealing.
   The equipment used today for studying brain activity con­
tains many electronic parts and devices which were developed
for radar apparatus during the war. An eeg recorder usually
has over a hundred valves, resistances, condensers, and so
forth, with many rows of calibrating and operating knobs and
switches. Its formidable and intricate appearance not infre­
quently prompts the uninitiated to ask whether such a display
of ingenuity is really necessary. But if we consider the com­
plexity of the object which it is designed and constructed to
examine, the most elaborate eeg equipment can only be re­
garded as comparatively simple in design - and extremely
coarse and clumsy in construction.
    The \ asic principle of it, at least, is simple enough. Electrodes
- meaning no more than the derivation of the word, ways for
electricity to pass - are firmly held to the scalp, where they pick
                                                                   83


===== PDF PAGE 084 =====

The Living Brain
up the minute voltages due to the electrical fluctuation in the
brain. These may be from all parts of the brain, but the
rhythms from the regions nearest to a given pair of electrodes
are most conspicuous in the amplifier channel connected to that
pair of electrodes.
  Significant discharges can be recognized which are as small
as 5 microvolts - that is, 5 millionths of a volt; the average is
higher than this, but anything above 50 microvolts is unusual




        IZtssHs&s         j   .   ...            Ill!•!>.!• H.



                              Figure 6
       .. the recognition of still smaller voltages is possible’
The top line is a record of a signal of one ten-millionth of a volt, indistin­
guishable against its background of ‘dismal universal hiss’, but detected
by the analyser and its frequency displayed far above the noise level.

except in children. With the automatic analyser the recognition
of still smaller voltages is possible. (See Figure 6.) Sustained
rhythmic activity at an amplitude of only one-tenth of a micro­
volt can be clearly distinguished against the background of
random noise. For some notion of the minuteness of such a
faint current it may be reckoned how many of them would have
to combine their voltage to light the common hand torch; 30
million of them might do it. The usual order of amplification
for recording and other observation is four million times.
   The frequency of a rhythm, the number of times a cycle of
its pattern is repeated in a second, is more significant than its
amplitude or voltage. The delta rhythm mentioned above has
84


===== PDF PAGE 085 =====

                                         Revelation by Flicker
a frequency of 0-5 to 3-5 cycles per second; the theta rhythm,
4 to 7 c/s; and the alpha rhythms, most prominent of all in
area and amplitude in normal adults, have a frequency of 8 to
13 c/s. (See Figure 5.)
    Any discovery is liable to be neglected or to give rise to
strange theories to account for new phenomena, whichever
branch of science may be concerned. Discoveries in physio­
logy are particularly vulnerable. This is not because physio­
logists are more sceptical or more gullible than other scientists,
but because their science is different. Until recently, whenever
the functioning of any nerve or organ had been demonstrated
in a few experiments, it was assumed that it would be the same
in any other individual. So, after years of neglect, Berger’s dis­
covery became the subject of theories based on inadequate
verification. By classical standards the two or three subjects
examined should have been sufficient for pronouncement of a
theory; today we know that there is so much variation between
individuals that we must have two or three thousand samples
before any new bit of information about the brain can be use­
fully incorporated in a hypothesis, and that many more thou­
sands must be examined and compared before venturing on a
general theory. The clerical work is therefore a problem in
itself. The adoption of statistical routine clinical work requires
the introduction of an elaborate punched card-index system in
which every card can hold any number of two hundred classi­
 fied items of information about the case, and all the cards con­
taining any given one or any combination of those items can
be assembled automatically. Thus the laboratory’s functions of
 memory and association begin to approximate crudely to those
 of the brain itself.
    Research was resumed, then, after the war, with a great body
 of knowledge on hand which had come into existence not quite
 so crudely as that obtained on the battlefield of an earlier war,
 but incidental to military events rather than as the result of
 planned scientific endeavour. There had to be much sifting of
 information, much refinement of instrumental technique. And
a corresponding improvement of statistical method; for, like
any other system of magnification, that of the thermionic
                                                               85


===== PDF PAGE 086 =====

The Living Brain
amplification of minute voltages has its limitations. Just as the
resolution of a microscope ends at the point at which Brownian
movement and the wavelength of light introduce their respec­
tive types of uncertainty, so the amplifiers of the physiologist
generate their undertone of what Milton called ‘a dismal
universal hiss’. Circumvention of this cannot be more than
partially successful. At some point therefore the physiologist
must patch with inspired imagery, if he is a Sherrington, or
with guesswork, the gaps which he cannot span by exact meas­
urement, hoping of course that a bold hypothesis may suggest
a crucial experiment that will be within the range of his re­
sources.
   It was rather in this happy speculative mood that the possi­
bility of finding out more about brain rhythms, by imposing
other patterns on the brain through the senses, was suggested.
Very few of the factors affecting the spontaneous rhythms were
under the observation or control of experimenter or subject.
Usually only the effects of opening and closing the eyes, of
doing mental arithmetic, of overbreathing, and of changes in
the blood sugar were recorded. Sometimes the influence of
drowsiness and drugs could be investigated. But the range and
variety of methods were not comparable with the scope and
sensitivity of the organ studied, and the information obtained
by them was patchy in the extreme. The only unequivocal
answers obtained by eeg had been to clinical problems; the
more subtle and transient variations in the normal state of the
brain escaped notice or had to be dismissed because their im­
portance could have been estimated only if a detailed continu­
ous assessment of the general state of the subject had been
available.
   In 1946 we found that the information contained in eeo
records could be greatly increased by subjecting the brain to
rhythmic stimulation, particularly by the flickering of a power-
light in the eyes, open or closed. Early experiments of this sort
had been done by shining a light through a rotating wheel with
wide spokes, but the results had been inconsistent. One trouble
was that as the frequency of the flicker was increased by turn­
ing the wheel faster, so the duration of each flash became
86


===== PDF PAGE 087 =====

                                           Revelation by Flicker
shorter. Furthermore, to obtain a bright enough flash, very
strong lights had to be used, and these tended to bum the retina.
At the end of the war, easy and accurate flicker was attainable
by employing an electronic stroboscope which can be calibrated
in fractions of a cycle per second, with a very short brilliant
flash, the duration of which does not vary with the frequency.
   It was found, as expected, that each flash of light evoked in
the brain a characteristic electrical response. Experiments on the
cortical response to light stimuli had become familiar before the
war. But now, with the fresh technique, strange patterns, new
and significant, emerged from the swift scribbling of the pens
in all channels of the eeg. (Figure 7.)
   The flash rate could be changed quickly by turning a knob
and at certain frequencies the rhythmic series of flashes ap­
peared to be breaking down some of the physiological barriers
between different regions of the brain. This meant that the
stimulus of the flicker received in the visual projection area of
the cortex was breaking bounds; its ripples were overflowing
into other areas. The consequent alteration of rhythms in other
parts of the brain could be observed from moment to moment
even by an amateur, as the red ink pen of the automatic
analyser flicked its new patterns caused by the changing flicker
frequencies, reporting the effect of them in one channel after
another.
   Flicker proved to be a key to many doors. We used it first as
a clinical aid in the diagnosis of epilepsy, but from the very first
its revelations were fundamental in both clinic and laboratory.
Observation of many thousands of resting records, taken from
epileptic patients during a quiet phase between seizures, had
shown that their brain rhythms tended to be grouped in fre­
quency bands. It was as if certain major chords constantly
appeared .against the trills and arpeggios of the normal activity.
This harmonic grouping suggested that if a masterful conductor
were introduced, the brain could be made to synchronize in a
 grand tutti, to develop under controlled conditions the majestic
 potentials of the convulsive seizure.
   Thus it was that flicker, introduced as an aid to diagnostic
interpretations, led us into new paths of research. The discovery
                                                                 87


===== PDF PAGE 088 =====

The Living Brain
      A


                                       ,«V«* 4+*»r*mV/                                              •n^
       -a*?
                                                         t±
             j I I j/      I                          . : ||
     1?... jJii.:.i4 .. jA A    -
     ^vHi44^/v
                                        FLICKER       fl 3 E » n 2 |
              ii: s a: I ”1__           ON         &8SSSSS11
                                                  -i:u:§,n.&it
     ------- hm-um-i—
      . LS5i:n?.s;; . 11            •::!•..:
                                      t^'/i ............        .                  |
                                              :: !•. :•. u u:; r. *.*. u s : • s • J          -: : . I \
     s 1l sun*.:::;;:::: ; ;:         • • • • i t h ii ii ii ii ii ii» ii a ■ i ■ n « * I .
                                    . ■ ■ » ■ i • n iitllilliniiKmii
                                                    iltl itlliniiltiHU n p      » »
                                                                                  m * •<
                                                                                      n • I   nail a n n
                                               'rrirrrtTiTr"ur-'-*\.uj»........\r*
                                             -vrrwrrrrr
                e                                        8        12




                                             D.
     ^W^VvAAjw
     -—**vwv»—l

                          jy^                                                                       'VSv*



                       j l^Ayu^A

                    FUCKER
                                                   'FLASH ON                    ----

88


===== PDF PAGE 089 =====

                                               Revelation by Flicker
that, in fact, appropriate frequencies of flicker did produce
seizures in predisposed subjects, confirmed the importance of
research with this method. The new information obtained in
this way about epilepsy has profoundly modified current no­
tions about the malady.
   Epilepsy has always been regarded with feelings that have
varied between religious awe, professional diffidence, and lay
horror - with as little reason in one case as another. The spe­
cialist was unable to account for it or even adequately define
it. Not that positive assertions are lacking in the literature of
the subject. They can be divided into two classes: the classical -
‘Epilepsy is the tendency to recurring epileptic seizures’ - and
the romantic - ‘Epilepsy is a paroxysmal cerebral dysrhythmia’.
Those in the first class may be discounted as tautologous, while
those in the second arouse the facile objection that in some
cases the condition is neither paroxysmal, nor cerebral, nor a
dysrhythmia. The clinical researches of Penfield and Jasper in
Canada and Gastaut in France are beginning to define more
clearly the medical problems raised by the experimental
 studies.
   The new information about epilepsy rather tends to excuse
 past failure to define or account for the malady, not because of
any additional obscurity but by raising the question whether
 we ought not perhaps to regard it as a functional atavism rather
 than a degeneration. Many afflictions, regarded and treated as
diseases, may be suspected of having functions of a normal
 physiological order. Dermatitis, inflammation of the nerve ends
 of the skin, is often found to have a regenerative effect and may


                                Figure 7
    *... strange patterns, new and significant, emerged ..

(a) The resting rhythm is at 8 c/s and flicker evokes another rhythm at
     12 c/s.
(b) Flicker changes the rhythms in all parts of the brain.
(c) Only four flashes of flicker were needed to evoke a seizure pattern in
     this epileptic.
(rf) Careful setting of the feedback trigger evoked a similar response in a
     normal subject.
                                                                        89


===== PDF PAGE 090 =====

The Living Brain
very well have its origin in some reaction of the defence mech­
anisms of the organism. A seeming mishap may have the func­
tion of averting a catastrophe. There is specific warrant, too,
for speculating in this way regarding the nature of epilepsy: the
similarity of a natural seizure and one induced by electric-shock
therapy is suggestive. And nature has many analogies. The
electrical discharges of its nerve-net accompanying the move­
ments of a jellyfish, described in an earlier chapter, are quite
similar to those that occur in the human brain during the con­
vulsive stage of a major seizure. We may be in the presence,
therefore, of a vestigial echo of that first remote foreshadow of
a brainstorm. On the other hand, when we have enough data
for such reckoning, we may get a statistical answer indicating
to what extent epileptic seizures may be a necessity for this or
that degree of complexity of combination between the myriad
million units of our Olympian nerve-net, considering that
wherever two or three nerve cells are gathered together a
seizure may occur.
   This notion, that epileptic seizures are not the exclusive
property of the clinically epileptic brain, is supported by obser­
vations of the effect of flicker on normal folk who have never
had any kind of attack or fit. In order to compare the clinically
epileptic responses with those of normals, we examined several
hundred ‘control’ subjects - schoolchildren, students, various
groups of adults. In three or four per cent of these, carefully
adjusted flicker evoked responses indistinguishable from those
previously regarded as ‘diagnostic’ of clinical epilepsy. When
these responses appeared, the subjects would exclaim at the
‘strange feelings’, the faintness or swimming in the head; some
became unresponsive or unconscious for a few moments; in
some the limbs jerked in rhythm with the flashes of light. The
moment such disagreeable sensations were reported the flicker
was of course turned off; recruitment of normal volunteers is
not encouraged by stories of convulsions which also might quite
unjustly impair the good repute of electroencephalography as
a harmless experience.
   The number of normal subjects who regularly and repeatedly
give these epileptic responses is a small proportion of the whole
90


===== PDF PAGE 091 =====

                                          Revelation by Flicker
population, but it is large enough to indicate that ‘epileptic’
phenomena can be evoked in normal people by physiological
stimulation of a certain type. This effect might be considered
merely as a laboratory curiosity were it not that the necessary
conditions occasionally occur by accident in everyday life.
   Since these observations were first reported many accounts
have been received from normal people who have had com­
parable experiences. For example, a correspondent in Amster­
dam writes: ‘I was still in the army and my driver and I were
driving home one day through an alley of trees in bright day­
light. As I was tired I relaxed in my seat and closed my eyes.
The sunlight that came through the trees played on my face,
when suddenly I was aware that I had made some violent
motions and woke up with one hand firmly on the windscreen
and that this had prevented me from falling off that jeep. I was
very puzzled and the next time we drove through the alley I
tried the experiment all over again, but now I was all set for it.
Now I could close my eyes but a very little while and I knew
that if I kept on, I would lose control. When I looked straight
ahead however, it did not bother me, except that I felt a bit
queer and always seemed to try to avoid the flickering light of
the trees, which I did with my hands before my eyes.’
   In another case a man found that when he went to the cinema
he would suddenly feel an irresistible impulse to strangle the
person next to him; he never did actually throttle anyone, but
came to himself with his hands around his neighbour’s throat.
This impulse was not dependent upon the subject of the film,
but occurred most often if he moved his head suddenly while
the film was on. When subjected to artificial flicker he developed
violent jerking of the limbs when the flash rate was high - up
to fifty per second - that is, about the flicker rate of the cinema
projector. He could prevent the jerking by voluntary tensing
of his arms. Another subject had several times ‘passed out’ for
an instant while cycling home on fine evenings down an open
avenue of trees. In his case, the failure of control induced by
the flicker had stopped his pedalling, and by thus slowing down
he had lowered the flicker frequency and terminated the effec­
tive stimulus pattern.
                                                                91


===== PDF PAGE 092 =====

The Living Brain
   In many subjects the degree of synchronization between the
flicker and the brain rhythms must be extremely precise to be
effective; an error of ten per cent may be too much. Such
accuracy is difficult to maintain by hand, particularly since
stimulation itself changes the frequency of the activity with
which it must be synchronized. In order to keep the flicker and
the brain in time, a feedback system of automatic control was
adopted. This is in the form of a trigger-circuit, the flash being
fired by the brain rhythms themselves at any chosen time
relation with any rhythmic component of the spontaneous or
evoked activity. Selection of the triggering signal can be made
on a basis of amplitude or location, as well as frequency, and
the delay between signal and flash can be set to anything be­
tween one second and a few milliseconds. Thus the whole
gamut of relations between a great variety of flicker stimuli and
any spontaneous brain rhythm at choice can be explored.
   With this instrument the effects of flicker are even more
drastic than when the stimulus rate is fixed by the operator. The
most significant observation is that in more than fifty per cent
of young normal adult subjects, the first exposure to feedback
flicker evokes transient paroxysmal discharges of the type seen
so often in epileptics. This ‘first time’ response dies away with
continuous exposure, except in the three or four per cent
already mentioned, suggesting that it may be connected with a
specific variation in the mechanism of learning which will be
described later.
   Lest it should be thought that intermittent illumination, by
fluorescent lights for example, is a serious hazard, it may be
comforting to repeat that only a few per cent of normal people
respond in this way at all, and all but very few of these only to
very bright short flashes at frequencies of ten to twenty per
second. The effective flash rate of fluorescent fittings is 100 to
120 per second and the flicker is only a small proportion of the
total light. Oddly enough it is not in the city, but in the jungle
conditions, sunlight shining through the forest, that we run the
greatest risk of flicker-fits. Perhaps, in this way, with their
slowly swelling brains and their enhanced liability to break­
downs of this sort, our arboreal cousins, struck by the setting
92


===== PDF PAGE 093 =====

                                          Revelation by Flicker
sun in the midst of a jungle caper, may have fallen from perch
to plain, sadder but wiser apes.
   But we must leave this subject now. The reader who wishes
to know more about eeg technique and artificial stimulation
as aids to the study of epilepsy, will find a lengthy account in
Electroencephalography, published in 1950, a 438-page sym­
posium on various aspects of the subject.
   In the biological sciences it is a good principle to be your own
rabbit, to experiment on yourself; in electroencephalography
the practice is widespread, convenient, and harmless. Whenever
a new instrument is to be tested or calibrated, normal subjects
from among the laboratory staff are used as ‘signal generators’.
Their brain rhythms vary very little from month to month and
the new device can be tested under operational conditions in
which its required performance can be predicted. When we
started to use high-power electronic stroboscopes to generate
flicker, with the aim of testing the hypothesis of resonant syn­
chronization in epilepsy, we took a large number of records
from one another while looking at the brilliant flashing light.
We wanted to make sure that there was no discomfort or danger
and that the enormous electric current which makes the flash -
a sort of artificial lightning - did not interfere with our record­
ing instruments. These tests were entirely satisfactory and in
fact gave us much information which will be discussed later;
but as well as that, we all noticed a peculiar effect. It must have
been observed before, but with the old-fashioned spinning-disc
method of making flicker its origin did not seem so puzzling.
This effect was a vivid illusion of moving patterns whenever one
closed one’s eyes and allowed the flicker to shine through the
eyelids. The illusion is most marked when the flicker is between
eight and twenty-five flashes per second and takes a variety of
forms. Usually it is a sort of pulsating check or mosaic, often
in bright colours. At certain frequencies - around ten per sec­
 ond - some subjects see whirling spirals, whirlpools, explosions,
 Catherine wheels.
   A vivid description of the experience is given by Margiad
Evans in A Ray of Darkness: ‘I lay there holding the green
thumbless hand of the leaf while things clicked and machinery
                                                                93


===== PDF PAGE 094 =====

The Living Brain
came to life, and commands to gasp, to open, and shut my eyes,
reached me from across the unseen room, as though by wireless;
Lights like comets dangled before me, slow at first and then
gaining a fury of speed and change, whirling colour into colour,
angle into angle. They were all pure ultra unearthly colours,
mental colours, not deep visual ones. There was no glow in
them but only activity and revolution.’
   With a rotating wheel generating flicker it might be argued
that these impressions were due to the rapid movement of the
shadow past the eye. We thought at first that a similar explana­
tion might be adequate with the electronic stroboscope. The
discharge takes place in a small spiral tube and it seemed pos­
sible that the luminous region might spin down this spiral and
thus produce the illusion. But the whole brilliant flash lasts for
only about twenty millionths of a second and actually the more
diffused the light, the more vivid the illusions. So we were
forced to the conclusion that what we were seeing was pro­
duced, not in the light, but in the eye or in the brain.
   We next supposed that our visions were derived from some
peculiarity of the retina, where millions of nerve cells in matted
layers transform the radiant energy of light into electrochemical .
changes which stimulate the optic nerve fibres. All sorts of dis­
tortions and aberrations could arise in this outpost of brain.
But study of the electrical pulsations set up in the retina itself -
the electroretinogram - showed no unusual effects. Further
more we became aware of another puzzling feature of these
flicker illusions: they were modified by the mental state of the
subject.
   These observations encouraged us to survey with greater
precision the subjective illusions described by a large number
of normal subjects and to analyse in detail the electrical brain
responses with which they were associated. The sensation of
movement and pattern, where all was still and void of detail,
was surprising and contradictory. It suggested that in testing
a device to study epilepsy we had stumbled on one of those
natural paradoxes which are the surest sign of hidden truth.
   The results obtained in these studies are too voluminous to
be detailed - indeed they are being added to daily by experiment
94


===== PDF PAGE 095 =====

                                         Revelation by Flicker
in many laboratories; but two points about records of evoked
responses taken during these periods of illusion may be noticed
here. 1. When the illusory sensation is primarily visual, the
electrical change is in the region of the visual projection and
association areas of the cortex. 2. When the sensation is related
to a non-visual sensory system, the response is in the region
where that system is cortically projected, the visual area res­
ponse in these conditions being diminished. The experiments
thus provide evidence on a grand scale and under precise con­
trol of what has already been referred to as the breaking down
of some of the physiological boundaries between different
regions of the brain, an overflow of visual response into other
sensory systems. It is something more than the casual ‘cross­
talk’ that causes confusion between the senses of taste and
smell.
   These two observations convinced us that the illusions we
had first noticed ourselves, now reported with such variety by
our experimental subjects, were due to some particularity of
brain function. Moreover there seemed a strong possibility that
many regions of the brain were involved in this deception. The
visual projection area by itself is too specialized and unoriginal
to create such picturesque apparitions.
   We have known well enough for some time what happens
in the brain at this point without knowing how it happens. We
have known that the result of the final processes is that we not
only see, which we can do quite absentmindedly, but that we
think about what we see. We may simply enjoy the sight, or
be moved by some less pleasant emotion; or it may remind us
of other scenes, people, ideas; it may provoke by symbol or
word some specific train of thought leading to action, or leave
us satisfied or expectant. In any case, none of these results can
be obtained by reception of the image on the projection area
alone. Somehow this image is communicated to the other areas
of the brain in which there is cognition - awareness - of sen­
sory perceptions, or recognition of them, remembrance and
association of them with other remembered sensory impressions
and all their associated thoughts, feelings, ideas. We could even
guess that, in order to achieve these very complex final pro­
                                                               95


===== PDF PAGE 096 =====

The Living Brain
cesses, the brain must be able to communicate every item of
information received in any one part of it to all its other parts.
The director, in effect, does not go to the projection room; he
has too many other things to direct, what with the other senses
and memories and all his own reflections; rather he has some
arrangement by which he is kept informed about anything that
might interest him during his waking hours.
   All this was asserted when our actual knowledge of the pro­
cesses described was limited to the visual areas of the cortex,
the existence of which could be demonstrated, and to observa­
tions in the clinic that when there was physical interference
between those areas and the so-called silent areas, things were
seen but not recognized. The inference from these observations
was quite legitimate. It was an instance of investigation by the
communication engineer’s method of the Black Box: without
ever looking into the box a good deal can be learned about what
is going on inside by checking incoming signals against out­
going signals. For some of our problems this will be a necessary
method of inquiry. But in probing further into the processes of
vision, while it cannot be said that the contents of the Black
Box have been completely exposed, a more direct means of
inquiry was found in flicker stimulation.
   The alpha rhythm - more properly, rhythms, since analysis
has shown that it is nearly always compound - has had two
special features of interest from quite early days. Its association
with differences of personality was not at first recognized but
from the very first Berger was able to show that it was affected
by the opening and shutting of the eyes, and by concentration
on some mental problem. In this connexion it is interesting to
note that the mechanism for opening the eyes is closely linked
in the brain with those which maintain attention and conscious­
ness. There are many curiosities in the relationship, however;
for although closing the eyes is an essential preliminary to sleep,
and may even induce sleep when the rest of the organism does
not particularly require it, many people can think better - more
actively, at least - with shut eyes; and visual imagery is usually
more vivid without the competition of real stimuli. Tests with
the eyes shut are therefore advantageous. Since the eyelids are
96


===== PDF PAGE 097 =====

                                          Revelation by Flicker
by no means opaque, the effect of closing the eyes in a bright
light is mainly to eliminate detail from vision; brilliance and
colour are of course altered, but the intensity of the flicker
stimulus may still be maximal with the eyes shut, using modern
equipment.
    Some beginning had already been made in the grouping of
subjects according to the activity of their alpha rhythms in
different circumstances; this was leading inevitably to the need
of extending observation beyond the usual bounds of physio­
logy into the field of physical personality. The discovery of the
theta rhythm was pointing in the same direction. The adoption
of flicker stimulation was itself like the projection of a new
beam of light on those manifestations of brain activity. Without
flicker, we could learn a good deal about eeg responses to
stimulation of various kinds. But the effect of flicker was to
produce in the brain, recorded in the eeg, a pattern of the same
kind as the spontaneous patterns in the brain. It could also be
given the same rhythmic value. That is, after ascertaining by
eeg analysis the frequency of a dominant pattern in the sub­

ject, the stroboscope could be regulated to produce a flicker
of the same frequency. This mirror frequency is not always
the one at which flicker has the greatest effect, but with the
trigger device already described, perfect synchronization can
 be achieved.
    Since stimulation methods, by definition, are expected to have
 some effect upon the subjects, note has to be taken not only of
 the eeg but of emotional and all other factors which may affect
 or be associated with the electrical changes recorded in it. The
 subject is asked to describe any unusual sensations; an attach­
 ment on his throat records the moment at which his remarks
 are made, so that the effect described can be related to the
 flicker frequency of the moment. The will of the subject can
 also be brought into play; he can, for instance, consciously and
 with effect resist or give way to the emotions or hallucinations
 engendered by the flicker, a matter of no little social interest as
 well as enlightenment on the question of self-discipline to be
 referred to later.
    The greatest variety of mental experiences are described, not
     L.8.-4                                                       97


===== PDF PAGE 098 =====

The Living Brain
by any means all of them unpleasant. Some have seen profuse
patterns of many colours, sometimes stable, sometimes moving;
one of the first patterns we saw ourselves, the whirling spiral,
recurs quite often and this may have a peculiar mechanical
significance as will be suggested later. Simple sensations in other
than the visual mode are experienced. Some describe feelings
of swaying, of jumping, even of spinning, and dizziness. Some
people feel a tingling and pricking of the skin. A few subjects
yielded epileptic patterns as already described. Auditory experi­
ences are rare; but there may be organized hallucinations, that
is, complete scenes, as in dreams, involving more than one
sense. All sorts of emotions are experienced: fatigue, confusion,
fear, disgust, anger, pleasure. Sometimes the sense of time is
lost or disturbed. One subject said that he had been ‘pushed
sideways in time’ - yesterday was at one side, instead of behind,
and tomorrow was off the port bow.
   Considering now these hallucinations in their simplest mani­
festation, how does it happen that the precise repetition of a
flash, making a field of light on the retina without pattern in
it, is seen as a moving pattern? The light is stationary; the eyes
are shut and do not move; the head and brain are still. Yet
something must move to produce moving patterns. We know
that the patterns are not produced externally; they cannot reach
the retina through the eye. We know that they are not formed
spontaneously on the retina; they are susceptible to change by
the mental state and attitude of the subject, and no anomalous
effects can be detected in electrograms taken from the retina.
   The imaginary patterns provoked by flicker in conjunction
with alpha rhythms are produced in the brain. Their move­
 ment is the movement of some hitherto unsuspected mechanism
 of the brain. What is this mechanism?
    The observed relations of the factors can be put into formal
 statements: Flicker plus x produces Movement.
                          F + x-----»-M
   Alongside this, consider our other unanswered question: how
is the director kept informed? How is the spatial image which
is received in the projection areas transferred to the other areas
98


===== PDF PAGE 099 =====

                                        Revelation by Flicker
for cognition? Here also is the movement of some mechanism
of the brain at work. We may say that alpha plus x produces
this final Image.
                        A + x----- >-I

   These are simultaneous equations in which the known fac­
tors, logically dealt with, agree with experience and from which
the unknown factors, reasonably assumed to be identical, can
be eliminated by subtraction of the first equation from the
second. This gives: A----> I — M + F. That is, the alpha rhythm
produces a motionless but intermittent image. Whatever it is
that combines with alpha and flicker to produce a moving
image, will combine with alpha to transfer an image to the final
stage, a process through which of course the hallucination
image also passes.
   Put in this attenuated form, and given the proviso that the
required mechanism has to be contained in the human head,
a communications engineer would jump to the only conclusion
which would seem possible to him: a scanning mechanism.
The most familiar example of such mechanism is in television,
where a space-pattern is most economically converted for trans­
mission into a time sequence of impulses by the scanning
mechanism of the camera. A scientist must be careful about
jumping to conclusions, but if we seem to do so in this case it
must be said that it is several years since we took off with the
first surmise, and that the American psychiatrist, Warren
 McCulloch, landed about the same time, quite independently,
on the same hypothetical spot, and we have not been warned
 off by the authorities.
   There is much to be said for the hypothesis. It is necessary
 to assume some mechanical principle which could be incorpor­
ated in apparatus compact enough to be carried about in the
 head, and no other principle of this character is known. Also,
 both equations are satisfied by x = scanning mechanism. The
 hypothesis indeed was not reached dialectically, but as a result
 of long scrutiny of the behaviour of the alpha rhythms under
 both conditions - that is, with and without flicker.
   There was, for instance, the curious coincidence between
                                                               99


===== PDF PAGE 100 =====

The Living Brain
the frequency of the alpha rhythms and the period of visual
persistence. This can be shown by trying how many words can
be read in ten seconds. It will be found that the number is
about one hundred - that is, ten per second, the average fre­
quency of the alpha rhythms. Scanning also explains an optical
illusion which can be tested. If two lights are available in the
same field of vision, when one of them is turned off just before
the other is turned on it looks as if there was a movement of
light from the first to the second. The illusion is accounted for
by the scanning interval.
   The cessation of the alpha rhythms in most subjects when the
eyes are opened and a pattern is seen, or when one is induced
by suggestion of an image of a visual or mental kind, is also
significant. It suggests that the alpha rhythms are a process
of scanning-searching for a pattern - which relaxes when a
pattern is found. It is as if you were looking for one particular
word in a page of print; you scan the page, line by line, until
you come to the word; then the scanning movement ceases;
anyone watching your eyes could tell when you had found what
you were looking for.
   The manner in which such a system might work in the brain
is illustrated in a device which we had developed for quite
another purpose, for reconverting line records, such as eegs,
back into electrical changes. (See Figure 8.) A cathode-ray
oscilloscope, photo-electric cell, and amplifier are arranged in a
feedback system such that the photo-cell ‘looks’ at the light
spot on the screen of the oscilloscope, the resulting voltage
being amplified and applied to the Y-plates of the oscilloscope,
thus deflecting the spot. The deflection reduces the apparent
brightness of the spot, thus altering the voltage, and giving the
spot a tendency to hover at a point near the edge of the screen.
If an opaque object is placed over the part of the screen toward
which the spot tends to move, the spot cannot get behind it
since its own disappearance abolishes the force deflecting it.
If a linear scanning voltage is applied, the spot will slide along
the profile of any curve placed on the screen. If, however, in
certain conditions, there is no pattern for it to scan, the system
tends to oscillate in a manner analogous to alpha rhythms.
 100


===== PDF PAGE 101 =====

                                              Revelation by Flicker
The oscilloscope screen may represent the projection area of
the visual cortex, which may be either vacant or occupied by
the projection upon it of an electroneural chart of the visual
field. The electron beam and spot of light represent the fluctu­
ating electrical activity generated by a contiguous association
area through excitation of chains of neurones leading through




                               Figure 8
   \.. the alpha rhythms may be a process of scanning ..
A profile scanning device. When a feedback scanning system has nothing
to scan it tends to oscillate. When it scans a pattern, its movements re­
produce a facsimile of. the pattern on a time base. Below, the alpha
rhythms of a normal subject seem to suggest similarity of mechanism in
                             model and brain.

the projection area. The photo-cell represents the other end of
the neurone chain which receives stimuli back from the pro­
jection area and completes the retroactive loop.
   The way in which the pattern of alpha rhythms is altered or
suppressed by imposed mental or visual patterns can be fol­
lowed in eeg recording; it can be watched with greater
dramatic effect in the toposcope where the dominant pattern
can be seen taking possession of the visual projection and
                                                                     101


===== PDF PAGE 102 =====

The Living Brain
association areas. When flicker is used, the display given by
the toposcope comes near to being a moving picture of a mind
possessed in quite another way. The correspondence between
the extent and complexity of the evoked responses on the one
hand, and the hallucinations of the subject on the other, is
striking. The more vivid and bizarre the experience of the
subject, the farther from the visual areas are the evoked re­
sponses, and the more peculiar their form and geometry. The
behaviour of the spontaneous and artificial rhythms in these
conditions is strictly in accordance with the effects to be ex­
pected from a scanning mechanism. The interference of flicker
with a normal process of scanning would be shown on a tele­
vision screen by illuminating the television studio with a
flickering light. The effect of this on the picture would be most
unpleasant, indeed hard to bear; blobs of light would dart
giddily about the screen. Similar confusion in the brain is seen
in our records and toposcopic observations, when the conflict
between the two time patterns, the inherent scanning rhythms
of the brain and the flicker, produce a brainstorm as wild as
any distortion on the television screen.
   A general theory such as this, about an organ of such com­
plexity and variability as the brain, cannot be verified or estab­
lished by any single experiment, as would be accordant with
the principles of classical physiology. It will be a matter of day
to day experience in many laboratories, to learn in time whether
the hypothesis will hold, as one new phenomenon after another
comes to test its suppositions. The time may not be long,
however; the new information being obtained by new tech­
niques and apparatus is voluminous and overflowing with in­
triguing suggestions. For instance, the whirling spiral so many
people see under flicker, is it not perhaps an indication of the
very path taken by the scanning point in the pattern it makes
every tenth of a second? -
   It would be tempting to develop here a complete theory of
scanning as the final stage of all the sensory processes; for it
seems to serve equally well to account for the cognition of other
than visual sensations. We shall be seeing later, for instance,
how appropriate it is for interpreting the theta rhythm as a
102


===== PDF PAGE 103 =====

                                          Revelation by Flicker
scanning for pleasure, a supposition well supported by the
mental experiences accompanying its evocation. But now some
mechanical pets are waiting in the next chapter, prepared to
explain in their simple fashion some of the phenomena already
discussed, or, like the White Knight’s inventions, divert us until
we reach the Eighth Square of thought and personality.


===== PDF PAGE 104 =====

      5
Totems, Toys, and Tools
      Am Ende hangen wir doch ab
      Von Creaturen die wir machten.
                           Goethe




The making of images may have a variety of purposes, and the
intention of the maker is not always clear to those who look on
them. This chapter will be about mimicry of life, so it may be
well to explain at the outset why a scientist resorts to methods
which might seem more appropriate to the entertainer, the
artist, or the priest. The suspicion that the scientist is not quite
sincere in professing that his purpose is purely mechanical and
illustrative goes a long way back. The notion of magic is deep-
rooted. A term, fairly applicable to our subject, for instance,
‘Electrobiology’, is found in Roget’s Thesaurus (authorized,
copyright edition, 1946), listed under ‘Acts of Religion’, in
the sub-section ‘Sorcery’.
   It all goes back to the totems of primitive man, to the images
we used to make of game or enemy on the walls of the cave, to
the images of their rivals into which village boys and girls still
hopefully stick pins. Then the totem is set up for worship,
developing perhaps into forms and images of great beauty and
unchallengeable piety and found in greater or less profusion
as iconoclast alternates with iconolater. There are images in
the canon of all faiths, excepting that of the Semites who
discovered the unrepresentable behind their graven images
and abolished them, and that of the Quakers and Christian
Scientists who never had any. We are daily reminded how
readily living and even divine properties are projected into
inanimate things by hopeful but bewildered men and women;
and the scientist cannot escape the suspicion that his projections
104


===== PDF PAGE 105 =====

                                      Totems, Toys, and Tools
may be psychologically the substitutes and manifestations of his
own hope and bewilderment.
   There is, however, a well-defined difference between the
magical and the scientific imitation of life. The former copies
external appearances; the latter is concerned with performance
and behaviour. Until the scientific era, what seemed most alive
to people was what most looked like a living being. The vitality
accorded to an object was a function primarily of its form.
Even ships, most wilful and exacting of all contrivances, were
not fully alive until they had been given a figurehead and
were formally christened and blessed, the figurehead being an
embodiment of the ship’s soul. Moreover, any performance by
a sacred image must be magical - a Virgin with an ingenious
mechanical smile would get no worship. Again, an image may
be only a toy. The technical genius of the Swiss watchmakers
was really wasted on the delicate clockwork automata; they
arouse only a passing interest because they are neither sacred
nor, like life, unpredictable, their performance being limited
to a planned series of motions, be it a boy actually writing a
letter or a girl playing a real keyboard instrument.
   With the coming of steam, and later electricity, a new sort of
automatic device became necessary, not as totem or toy but as
tool, something to enable a machine to control its own effective
use of the power it generates. The first steam engine, left to
itself, was unstable - pressure went down when power was used
and boiler blew up when it was not used. Watt introduced the
safety valve and automatic governor which stabilize by them­
selves both boiler pressure and engine speed. These two import­
ant devices were taken rather as a matter of course by engineers,
but the great Clerk Maxwell devoted a paper to the analysis
of Watt’s governor. Maxwell was perhaps the first to realize the
significance of this key process of feedback. Later, physiologists
pointed out that Watt had incidentally constructed in principle
the first working model of a reflex circuit similar to what they
describe in the organization of sense organs, nerves, and
muscles. Self-regulating devices, so common today that their
existence is taken as a matter of course by the millions who use
them, are the gas oven and refrigerator thermostats and the
                                                              105


===== PDF PAGE 106 =====

The Living Brain
automatic volume-control in your radio which maintains the
volume of sound within certain limits.
   But until the invention of the thermionic valve, any ambition
to construct a true imitation of a reflex circuit, let alone follow
in the footsteps of Mary Shelley and her Frankenstein, would
have been a scientific vanity. Consider for a moment what a
‘monster’ indeed would be a working model of the brain, even
with the miniature valves and other components available
today.
   First, some model living cells - what would be the smallest
size theoretically possible? They would have to generate,
accumulate, discharge, and regenerate their own minute volt­
ages. If the necessary chemical contents of one cell, with insula­
tion, capacitance, and trigger mechanism, could be crowded
into a quarter of a cubic inch, it would be a miracle of con1
struction, though still gross compared with the original. To put
aside the standard number of these cells, 10,000 million, for one
brain, while considering the wiring problem, warehousing space
of about one and a half million cubic feet would be required.
   The kind of circuit necessary to imitate the behaviour of a
nerve fibre was a laboratory problem of no mean order and
only recently solved. Just consider the specification for a model
nerve. It must conduct an impulse in both directions, wherever
the impulse is applied; it must convey what is known as an all-
or-nothing impulse, followed by a refractory period - when no
impulse is carried; moreover, the travelling impulse must be
self-propagating and non-decremental - that is, it must travel
any distance without decreasing its volume or voltage. The
difficulties of design and construction were overcome only after
many experiments; a diagram of the circuit will be found in
Appendix A. Supposing a sufficient number of these simplest
of imitation nerves were constructed, more millions of cubic
 feet of warehousing would be required.
   At this point we might have to consider cost. A cell with
one fibre might conceivably be made for a shilling - in all,
say, £500,000,000. Wiring connexions, 1020 of them, at two­
 pence each, say £1,000,000,000,000,000,000. Power required
would be at least a million kilowatts, even if the transistor
106


===== PDF PAGE 107 =====

                                      Totems, Toys, and Tools
crystal were used instead of the prodigal thermionic valve; the
human brain runs on twenty-five watts. The cost would be
incalculable. And the comparable cost of producing a first-class
living brain? Five thousand pounds?
   No, nobody is going to make an artificial brain on those lines,
even with the smallest and cheapest conceivable midget parts.
An entirely different approach seemed necessary to make it a
practical problem, if we were to learn about life by imitation as
well as observation of living things.
   One other possible approach to the baffling complexities of
the nervous system there did seem to be. What we have just
reduced to absurdity is any prospect of reproducing all its
elaboration of units in a working model. If the secret of the
brain’s elaborate performance lies there, in the number of its
units, that would be indeed the only road, and that road would
be closed. But since our inquiry is above all things a question
of performance, it seemed reasonable to try an approach in
which the first consideration would be the principles and char­
acter of the whole apparatus in operation.
   This raised a new question in brain physiology. It meant
asking whether the elaboration of cerebral functions may pos­
sibly derive not so much from the number of its units, as from
the richness of their interconnexion.
   As a hypothesis, this speculation had the great advantage
that its validity could be tested experimentally. An imitation of
two or three interconnected elements, including reflex circuits
to demonstrate their behaviour, should be a simple matter for
a laboratory that had produced the eeg analyser and the
toposcope.
   But how many elements would be needed to demonstrate
this? How many elements could be managed? Here we ran into
an unforeseen difficulty - that of reckoning how many ways
of behaviour are possible with a given number of elements.
Neither mathematicians nor communication-engineers were
acquainted with precisely the problem this raised.
   Reduced to its simplest form the question is, how many ways
of behaviour would be possible for a creature with a brain
having only two cells? Behaviour would depend on the activity
                                                              107


===== PDF PAGE 108 =====

The Living Brain
of one or both of these cells - call them A and B. If (1) neither
is active, there would be no action to be observed; if (2) A is
active, behaviour of type a would be observed; if (3) B is
active, behaviour of type b; if (4) A and B are both active, but
independently, there would be behaviour of both types a and
by mixed together; if (5) A is ‘driving’ B, type b would be
observed but subordinate to A; if (6) B is ‘driving’ A, type a
would be subordinate to B; if (7) A and B are ‘driving’ each
other, behaviour will alternate between type a and type b. The
internal states of such a system in these seven modes may be
represented symbolically as:
             O, A, B, A-f-B, A-»B, A-<-B, A+^B
with behaviour types:

             o, a, b, a+ b, b(fA), a(fB), ababab ...

   From the above it will be seen that the first four ways of
behaviour would be identifiable by simple observation, without
interfering with the system, whereas the last three could only
be identified by operating on the system - by, as it were, dis­
secting out the arrows.
  Thus, with only two elements interconnecting, there are
seven modes of existence. With six units there would be enough
modes to provide a new experience every tenth of a second
throughout a long lifetime. If there are n elements, the number
of modes is given approximately by M = 2(n'-n) for six or more
elements. So an extremely varied behaviour is possible when
a modest collection of elements is capable of intricate inter­
action. If the reader would like to calculate how many possible
modes there might be in the brain, with its ten thousand million
elements, take the number 2 and double it a hundred million
million million times - which is making a fantastic ‘monster’
of the brain itself.
   How many functional units, then, we may ask, must a brain
contain in order to account for its behaviour, assuming the
interconnexion may be as complete and varied as it is usually
supposed to be? As a start, we may suggest that the number of
108


===== PDF PAGE 109 =====

                                       Totems, Toys, and Tools
active elements may be of the order of 1,000 ensembles of
homologous neurones. If these are capable of dynamic com­
binations and permutations according to the above equation,
then the number of behaviour patterns possible would be of the
order of lO300*000 - that is, if written out at length, a figure so
long that it would fill more than a hundred pages of this book.
Even were many millions of permutations excluded as being
lethal or ineffective, the number is still large enough to satisfy
the requirements of individuality and plasticity.
   The outlook for an experimental model brightened at once
with the problem reduced to the behaviour of two or three
elements. Instead of dreaming about an impossible ‘monster’,
some elementary experience of the actual working of two or
three brain units might be gained by constructing a working
model in those very limited but attainable proportions.
   But if the performance of a model is to be demonstrably a
fair imitation of cerebral activity, the conditions of stimulation
and behaviour must equally be comparable with those of the
brain. Not in looks, but in action, the model must resemble an
animal. Therefore it must have these or some measure of these
attributes: exploration, curiosity, free-will in the sense of
unpredictability, goal-seeking, self-regulation, avoidance of
dilemmas, foresight, memory, learning, forgetting, association
of ideas, form recognition, and the elements of social accom­
modation. Such is life.
  This rules out the charming creations of the Swiss watch­
makers; in spite of the intention of the artificers, evident in the
name of ‘automates’, they are not automata in the sense of
being endued with spontaneous motion, and in no sense of the
word have they any claim to autonomy or self-regulation. Their
performance is prescribed or, as we say today, programmed
from beginning to end of the starting impulse.
   Nor can variety of programming endow a machine with the
autonomous qualities of a true mimicry of life. The computing
machine is a model of nineteenth-century predestination; it
was devised more than a hundred years ago without a thought
of imitating the living brain. The works of two mathematicians
of the day, Boole and Babbage, taken together, provide all the
                                                               109


===== PDF PAGE 110 =====

The Living Brain
basic theoretical and mechanical knowledge necessary for a
blue-print of one of the giant machines, lacking only the ther­
mionic valve to give it the speed of an electron instead of a
piston. A third famous Victorian mathematician immortalized
their manner of operation for all children, young and old: ‘Can
you do addition?’ the White Queen asked. ‘What’s one and
one and one and one and one and one and one and one and one
and one?’ ‘I don’t know,’ said Alice. ‘1 lost count.’ The algebra
of Boole is the. algebra of yes and no. Computers are essentially
machines that do sums in that fashion but don’t lose count.
Babbage made one in 1822; a few years later when he was
constructing a much more elaborate one for the Government
he discovered a new mechanical arrangement which he called
‘the engine eating its own tailj. The discovery no doubt made
it very tedious to go on with the machine already begun, on
which he had spent £6,000 of his own and £17,000 of Govern­
ment money; in any case official support was withdrawn in
 1842, and the completed fragment - ‘a beautiful machine which
does its work with unerring accuracy but is useless’, as described
not long after Babbage died in 1871 - ended in the South
Kensington Museum. His analytical engine was never con­
structed. It is recorded that ‘in his later years he was chiefly
known by his fierce hostility to organ-grinders’ - envious
perhaps of the persistent demonstration of their ‘engines’ while
his remained on paper, 400 detailed drawings and many
volumes of notes. It was, in the modern style, to be programmed
by punched cards, with special cards for particular functions;
it was to calculate the numerical values of any formula or
function of which the mathematician could indicate the method
of solution, relieving him ‘of all the drudgery of computing’,
and was of course to print its answer. Among the wonders of
constructional anticipation it is comparable with those of Hero
of Alexander and Leonardo da Vinci.
   The first attempt to make a machine that would imitate a
living creature in performance, as distinguished from appear-
anee, seems to have been suggested by the familiar test of
animal intelligence in finding the way out of a maze. Thomas
Ross in 1938 made a machine in America which successfully
110


===== PDF PAGE 111 =====

                                      Totems, Toys, and Tools
imitated this experiment By trial and error it could ‘learn’ to
find its way to a correct goal on a system of toy-train tracks.
Another tram-like creature of the same species, Machina laby-
rinthea, to give it a mock-biological name, was also built by an
American, R. A. Wallace, in 1952, ‘to demonstrate that a
relatively small and simple digital computing machine can solve
a class of conceptual problems other than numerical calcula­
tions’. It also runs on minute rails, with automatic switches, or
‘choice-points’, of which it can cope with sixty-three and get
home without programming as to the order of exploration or
any assistance in summating its experience. Once it has found
its way home, its choices are pre-set - it has programmed its
own route and, restarted from the same point, will go direct
home without error. Claude Shannon has also devised a maze­
learning creature, less rail-bound, a sort of electro-mechanical
mouse that fidgets its way out of confinement.
   Thus, within its limits, with a predestined end and a predict­
able course, M. labyrinthea is goal-seeking and self-regulating.
Like other machines, it is said to have a kind of memory. But
the use of the word at this juncture is unfortunate, seeming to
claim a likeness to the flesh that cannot be upheld in detail.
Storage of information there certainly is, but it is as unequi­
vocal as the information stored in a book and, being metallic,
less perishable. Human memory is subtle, variable, reinforce-
able in strange roundabout ways, and fallible. The engineer
does not imitate it and does not wish to. ‘Memory’, in this
connexion had better be forgotten, with ‘giant brains’.
   Another machine with a predestined end, but quite unpre­
dictable behaviour in reaching it, is Ashby’s Homeostat. This
creature, Machina sopora, it might be called, is like a fireside
cat or dog which only stirs when disturbed, and then methodic­
ally finds a comfortable position and goes to sleep again. There
 are a number of electronic circuits similar to the reflex arcs in
the spinal cord of an animal. They are so combined with a
number of thermionic valves and relays that out of 360,000
possible connexions the machine will automatically find one
 that leads to a condition of dynamic internal stability. That
is, after several trials and errors, the instrument, without any
                                                               111


===== PDF PAGE 112 =====

The Living Brain
prompting or programming, establishes connexions which tend
to neutralize any change that the experimenter tries to impose
from outside. So far as it goes, the homeostat is a perfect ex­
ample of self-regulation by negative feedback - in fact, it is all
negative feedback, like a steam engine that works nothing but
the safety valve and governor. A very curious and impressive
fact about it, however, is that, although the machine is man­
made, the experimenter cannot tell you at any moment exactly
what the machine’s circuit is without ‘killing’ it and dissecting
out the ‘nervous system’ - that is, switching off the current and
tracing out the wires to the relays.
   What we find in this fireside companion is not only the virtue
of self-control and the blessing of homeostasis, not only an
exemplification of placidity, but also of plasticity, one of the
basic principles that seem to govern animal engineering. This
means roughly that every part of the mechanism is reversible,
interchangeable, and expendable - but not replaceable. As a
description of a system of interconnexions, this is really only
half true about the brain, or only true about half the substance
of the brain. Overlooking this important point of internal
resemblance to an animal nervous system, and judging M.
sopora entirely by its behaviour, the naturalist would classify
it as a plant. More recently Ashby has made and studied a
simple machine, functionally related to M. labyrinthea, which
adjusts its internal connexions when presented with two suc­
cessive stimuli. He has also begotten an heir to Homeostat -
with twenty-five times as many elements.
   We now come to an electromechanical creature which be­
haves so much like an animal that it has been known to drive a
not usually timid lady upstairs to lock herself in her bedroom,
an interesting blend of magic and science.
   The first notion of constructing a free goal-seeking mech­
anism goes back to a wartime talk with the psychologist
Kenneth Craik, whose untimely death was one of the greatest
losses Cambridge has suffered in years. When he was engaged
on a war job for the Government, he came to get the help of
our automatic analyser with some very complicated curves he
had obtained, curves relating to the aiming errors of air
112


===== PDF PAGE 113 =====

                                     Totems, Toys, and Tools
gunners. Goal-seeking missiles were literally much in the air in
those days; so, in our minds, were scanning mechanisms. Long
before the home study was turned into a workshop, the two
ideas, goal-seeking and scanning, had combined as the essential
mechanical conception of a working model that would behave
like a very simple animal. At the same time, this conception
held promise of demonstrating, or at least testing the validity
of, the theory that multiplicity of units is not so much respon­
sible for the elaboration of cerebral functions, as the richness
of their interconnexion. With the minimum two elements there
should be seven modes of existence. And there was another
good reason, apart from the avoidance of unnecessary mech­
anical complications, for the utmost economy of design in
Machina speculatrix, inevitable name of the species for the
discerning, though ‘tortoise’ to the profane; it would demon­
strate the first of several principles exemplified in the mechan­
isms of most living creatures. A few notes on these principles
will illustrate the behaviour of M. speculatrix, from the obser­
vation of which indeed much has been learned about them.
    1. Parsimony. The nineteenth century raised its poetic eye­
brows at ‘Nature’s prodigality’; the twentieth century is no less
surprised by the economy of structure and function discovered
in the mechanics of life. There are very few redundant organs
 in present-day animals and many parts of the body were origin­
ally something quite different. ‘Mend-and-make-do’ is a popular
slogan in the struggle for existence. In M. speculatrix the
number of units corresponding to nerve cells is limited to two;
 there are two miniature valves, two relays, two condensers, two
small electric motors, two batteries. These two ‘sense reflexes’
operate from two ‘receptors’ - one a photo-electric cell, which
gives the organism sensitivity to light, the other an electrical
 contact serving as a touch receptor, which gives it responsive­
 ness to material obstacles. The variations of behaviour patterns
exhibited even with such economy of structure are complex
 and unpredictable.
    2. Speculation. A typical animal propensity is to explore the
 environment rather than to wait passively for something to
 happen. This faculty gives the device its name and distinguishes
                                                              113


===== PDF PAGE 114 =====

The Living Brain
it from other machines. The most elaborate computing machine
does not look round for problems to solve; nor do M. laby-
rinthea and sopora. But M. speculatrix is never still except
when ‘feeding’ - that is, when the batteries are being recharged.
Like the restless creatures in a drop of pond water, it bustles
around in a series of swooping curves, so that in an hour it will
investigate several hundred square feet of ground. In its ex­
ploration of any ordinary room it inevitably encounters many
obstacles; but, apart from stairs and fur rugs, there are few
situations from which it cannot extricate itself.
   3. Positive tropism. Sensory susceptibility to the attractions
of the environment. The one positive tropism of M. speculatrix
is exhibited by its movement towards lights of moderate inten­
sity. The photo-cell, amplifier, and motors are connected in
such a way that, when an adequate light signal is received, the
exploratory behaviour is checked and the organism orientates
itself towards the light and approaches it. Until it ‘sees’ a
light, the photo-receptor is in continuous rotation, scanning
the horizon for light signals. This scanning process is linked
with the steering mechanism in such a way that the ‘eye’ is
always looking in the direction of movement; thus, when a
signal is received from any direction, the machine is in a
position to respond without too much manoeuvring.
   4. Negative tropism. Certain perceptible variables, such as
very bright lights, material obstacles, and steep gradients, are
repellent to M. speculatrix’, in other words, it shows negative
tropism towards these stimuli. Observing the principle of par­
simony, this is accomplished without introduction of additional
components, by making any slight displacement of the organ­
ism’s shell close a contact which converts the photo amplifier
into an oscillator; this causes alternating movements of butting
and withdrawal; so that the robot pushes small obstacles out of
the way, goes round heavy ones, and avoids slopes. This device
automatically introduces the next important principle.
   5. Discernment. Distinction between effective and ineffective
behaviour. When the machine is moving towards an attractive
light and meets an obstacle, or finds the way too steep, the
induction of internal oscillation does not merely provide a
114


===== PDF PAGE 115 =====

                                       Totems, Toys, and Tools
means of escape - it also eliminates the attractiveness of the
light, which has no interest for the machine until after the
obstacle has been dealt with. There is a brief ‘memory’ of the
obstacle, so that the search for lights, and attraction to them
when found, is not resumed for a second or so after a material
conflict.
   6. Optima. A tendency to seek conditions with moderate
and most favourable properties, rather than maxima. The
circuit of M. speculatrix (shown in Appendix B) is so adjusted
that exploration is undertaken in darkness and moderate lights
are attractive, whereas bright lights are repulsive. Thus the
machine can avoid the fate of the moth in the candle. Also,
with the scanning device, it can avoid the dilemma of Dante’s
free man, intra due cibi, or of Buridan’s ass, which starved to
death, as some animals acting tropistically in fact do, because
two exactly equal piles of hay were precisely the same distance
away. If placed equidistant from two equal lights, M. specula­
trix will not aim itself half-way between them, but will visit
first one and then the other.
   7. Self-recognition. The machines are fitted with a small
flash-lamp bulb in the head which is turned off automatically
whenever the photo-cell receives an adequate light signal.
When a mirror or white surface is encountered the reflected
light from the head-lamp is sufficient to operate the circuit
controlling the robot’s response to light, so that the machine
makes for its own reflection; but as it does so, the light is extin­
guished, which means that the stimulus is cut off - but removal
of the stimulus restores the light, which is again seen as a
stimulus, and so on. The creature therefore lingers before a
mirror, flickering, twittering, and jigging like a clumsy Nar­
cissus. The behaviour of a creature thus engaged with its own
reflection is quite specific, and on a purely empirical basis, if it
were observed in an animal, might be accepted as evidence of
some degree of self-awareness. In this way the machine is
superior to many quite ‘high’ animals who usually treat their
reflection as if it were another animal, if they accept it at all.
This leads on to:
   8. Mutual recognition. Two creatures of the same type,
                                                                115


===== PDF PAGE 116 =====

The Living Brain
attracted by one arvother’s light, both extinguish the source of
attraction in themselves in the act of seeking it in others. There­
fore, when no other attraction is presented, a number of the
machines cannot escape from one another; but nor can they
ever consummate their ‘desire’, and when seen from the back
or side a fellow creature is merely an obstacle. In a sense, then,
a population of machines forms a sort of community, with a
special code of behaviour. When an external stimulus is applied
to all members of such a community, they will of course see it
independently and the community will break up; then, the
more individuals there are, the smaller the chance of any one
achieving its goal, for each individual finds in the others con­
verging obstacles.
   9. Internal stability. One of the advantages of making a
moderate light a positive stimulus is that this can be used as a
sign or symbol for the energy which the creatures require for
their sustenance - electricity. A light is placed in their ‘hutch’
in such a position that they are attracted to it, and therefore
tend to enter the hutch of their own accord. However, if their
batteries are fully charged, the intensity of the light operates
the repelling circuit when over the threshold, and they with­
draw for further exploration. When their batteries require re­
charging, on the other hand, moderation gives place to appetite
and the light continues to exert an attraction until they are well
within their quarters. At this point, contacts on the side of the
shell can engage with others in the hutch, thus closing the
battery-charging circuit. Current flowing in this circuit operates
a relay which turns off the power to their sensory and motor
systems, so that the machine remains motionless until, the
battery voltage having risen, the charging current falls and their
internal mechanism is once again energized. This arrangement
is very far from perfect; there is no doubt that, if left to them­
selves, a majority of the creatures would perish by the wayside,
their supplies of energy exhausted in the search for significant
illumination or in conflict with immovable obstacles or insa­
tiable fellow creatures.
   Some of these patterns of performance were calculable,
though only as types of behaviour, in advance; some were quite
116


===== PDF PAGE 117 =====

                                      Totems, Toys, and Tools
unforeseen. The faculties of self-recognition and mutual recog­
nition were obtained accidentally, since the pilot-light was in­
serted originally simply to indicate when the steering-servo was
in operation. It may be objected that they are only ‘tricks’, but
the behaviour in these modes is such that, were the models real
animals, a biologist could quite legitimately claim it as evidence
of true recognition of self and of others as a class. The import­
ant feature of the effect is the establishment of a feedback loop
in which the environment is a component. This again illustrates
an important general principle in the study of animal behaviour
- that any psychological or ecological situation in which such
a reflexive mechanism exists, may result in behaviour which
will seem, at least, to suggest self-consciousness or social con-
ciousness.
   The way in which the social behaviour of the models breaks
down under the influence of a competitive struggle for a com­
mon goal, imitates almost embarrassingly some of the less
attractive features of animal and human society. That is the
fault of the maker, who could, however, easily endow his crea­
tures as man is endowed, with a discriminatory recognition
circuit that would function in an emergency, a ‘women-and-
children-first’ reflex.
   Further, it would only be a matter of patience and ingenuity
to endow M. speculatrix with other ‘senses’ besides sight and
touch, to enable it to respond to audible signals audibly, and so
forth; also to provide it with hands - with a different tool for
each finger, dream of our electronic childhood! For the time
being we have removed, and shall presently be describing as
characteristic of a separate species, M. docilis, that part of the
brain with which it could learn how to use any tools put into
those hands. There is no serious difficulty about the elaboration
of function, once the principles of mechanical ‘life’ have been
demonstrated in a working model. If the principles are pre­
served, no matter how elaborate the functions of the machine,
its mimicry of life will be valid and illuminating. On the other
hand, if the principles are abandoned in favour of programming
the machine for special purposes, as Wiener foresees, the result
may be productive, the machine may entirely supplant human
                                                              117


===== PDF PAGE 118 =====

The Living Brain
labour in the factory, but it will be of little interest to the physio­
logist. It will no longer be part of a mirror for the brain.
   The character of M. speculatrix as the prototype of an elec­
tromechanical species, however, is not dependent on the possi­
bilities of elaboration, but contrariwise on the impossibility of
any simplification of the functional mechanism. Little virtue or
interest would lie in achieving lifelike effects with a multiplica­
tion of mechanisms greater than life would tolerate. Creatures
with superfluous organs do not survive; the true measure of
reality is a minimum. Occam's razor is as sharp in the struggle
for existence as it is in wordy strife.
   This law can be seen at work in the progeny of M. specula­
trix: the sports and unadaptable mutations fade away, the suc­
cessful imitations already form more than one sub-species. Most
interesting among these is an acknowledged offspring reported
last year by a brilliant young American engineer, Edmund C.
Berkeley. It is, not inappropriately, a squirrel compared with
the British tortoise; ‘a squirrel gathering nuts’, was the specifi­
cation; meanwhile it is practising on golf balls with its ingenious
scoops. It would not in any case live on nuts, even if it could
gather them; it subsists on the same fare as its prototype, on
the design of which also its essential mechanisms are based. Its
creator calls it Squee; in the annals of mock-biology it is likely
to be remembered as M. speculatrix berkeleyi.
   The educated laboratory mascot, M. docilis, the ‘easily
taught’ machine, will presently be found worthy of separate
attention. But the untutored ones are not to be despised. As
toys they refresh the spirit of the laboratory children we all are,
leading us to familiarity with more and more elaborate mech­
anisms. As tools they are trustworthy instruments of explora­
tion and frequent unexpected enlightenment. As totems they
foster reverence for the life they have so laboriously been made
to mime in such very humble fashion - and still would foster it
even should they, creatures of ‘sorcery’ peering into the dim
‘electrobiological’ future in search of a deus ex machina, look
up at us and declare that God is a physiologist.


===== PDF PAGE 119 =====

      6
Learning About Learning
      Time and Education begets Experience;
      Experience begets Memory;
      Memory begets Judgement and Fancy;
      Judgement begets the strength and
      structure, and Fancy begets
      the ornaments of a Poem.
                                Hobbes




The new techniques with which to fashion a mirror for the
brain have already provided glimpses of the mechanisms of its
more accessible parts, where the reception of sensory impres­
sions can be tested with controlled stimuli; and some of its more
simple functions have been imitated. This suggested various
physiological theories, including:
   1. A theory of internal scanning as a function of electrical
brain rhythms in the final stage of sensory perception.
   2. A theory that the elaboration of brain function is due to
the richness of interconnexion, rather than the multiplicity, of
its parts.
   3. The outline of a general theory of organic construction.
   These theories were reached in procedure such as the father
of modern physiology, Claude Bernard, desired for a ‘true
scientist’, a methodical feedback system of ‘experimental theory
and experimental practice’, the one always leading back to the
other. It seems timely to recall this principle when setting now
a course new to physiology.
   The subject of learning was naturally reserved to those who
studied the mind, without reference to the mechanisms of the
brain, while physiologists neglected that organ. Bernard is in­
voked for the assurance that scientific method will not become
less methodical in his sense when the field widens and complica­
tions increase; it will continually alternate between practice and
                                                              119


===== PDF PAGE 120 =====

The Living Brain
theory, devising experiments and apparatus appropriate to the
complexities of the matter. In this chapter, after various ways
of learning have been discussed, two converging paths of re­
search, stemming from the initiative of Pavlov and Berger re­
spectively, will be traced. This will lead in the next chapter to a
description of the processes of associative thinking and the
mechanism of learning, illustrated by a working model.
   A dictionary definition of learning is: any acquisition by an
organism of knowledge, skill, or modes of behaviour. The
psychological literature of learning was already vast long before
anyone thought of looking for living mechanisms of learning;
nor is it the fault of the psychologists if the brain is still neg­
lected by them; the new techniques are still too complicated.
On the other hand, some of the old investigations, upon which
much psychological doctrine is based, are too simple for this
world. The classical experiment of Wertheimer, for instance,
hero of Gestalt, still a popular doctrine in educational circles,
was the following: Chicken feed was placed in two bowls, one
light and the other medium grey; both were accessible to a hen,
but she was always driven away from the medium grey one, so
acquired the habit of feeding always from the light grey one;
when, in place of this light one, a dark grey bowl was offered
along with the medium, what was the delighted surprise of Herr
Wertheimer when the hen chose to eat from the medium bowl!
‘The dog it was that died.’ Why was the experimenter surprised?
Did he expect the hen to remember the precise shade of grey
that was taboo? According to his followers, the hen’s ability
to distinguish the lighter shade of two is not associational but
somehow a confutation of associational ideas of learning. A
pathetic fallacy. What the nervous system receives from the
sense organs is information about differences - about ratios
between stimuli.
   Professor Thorndyke’s cats have been almost as influential as
Wertheimer’s hen. They get out of a box by a wild scrambling
which is modified by experience; and some psychologists think
that adult learning may be of that order. They find it difficult
to believe that Kohler’s apes, in another famous series of tests,
 associate stick and fruit before using the one to get the other.
120


===== PDF PAGE 121 =====

                                        Learning About Learning
They prefer to say that ‘the situation becomes organized’, and
that the deed is done in a flash of illumination. On the other
hand, the doctrine of associational learning runs to two antag­
onistic extremes of behaviouristic theory, in Russia and in
America.
   Too many of these ideas about mental functions are not in
the field of ‘experimental theory and experimental practice’;
they are closed theories, conclusions; their proponents or pro­
moters, temperamentally intolerant of uncertainty, are so eager
for a single theory applicable to all types of learning that
anomalous facts have to be crammed into the bag with what­
ever statistical wrapping can be found for them. The truth
seems to be that there are many ways of learning and that the
field is open for a physiological description of some of them.
   Casting about for the very simplest way of learning, we meet
at once the old question of what is meant by instinct, a word
so widely abused that it is often deliberately avoided and some
more specific term used in its place. Can it be said that what is
done ‘instinctively’ has been learnt?
   Some enlightening results have come from studies of the
behaviour of new-born animals, especially birds, which indicate
the existence of a hitherto quite unsuspected mechanism.
Lorenz first made known the curious fact that whatever a
gosling, for instance, first sees in the hours after hatching, be
it bird, beast, or man, the gosling will follow as it normally
would follow its mother. The fixation is demonstrated as not
essentially on the mother but on any first moving object per­
ceived. There is no specific mother or child instinct; it is literally
blind instinct, so far as choice of the love-object is concerned.
It is an ever fixed mark. How persistent is the fixation was
shown in another experiment in which the first thing presented
to the eyes of a budgerigar remained for ever its only object
of attachment and its days of courtship were spent in trying to
make love to a ping-pong ball. This miniature tragedy might
seem to support the Freudian choice of sex, rather than love,
as the basic impulse. But we realize today that this was an
unfortunate narrowing of the truth. It is quite clear that this
‘learning by imprinting’, as it is called, is not related to sex
                                                                  121


===== PDF PAGE 122 =====

The Living Brain
development; on the contrary, it is exclusively tied to the
earliest phase in the life of the animal. If the chick is not
allowed to see any moving object at all in its first hours, and
only later on is presented with one, no fixation, no imprinting,
takes place.
    A working model of the mechanism is simple. A feedback
trigger circuit provides channels for the reception of a number
of possible stimuli, and is so constructed that, when any one of
them is activated, it locks on, and a common reflex puts all the
other channels out of action - that is, excepting the one already
locked.
    Mammals seem to be less susceptible to mental imprinting
than birds, though it has been observed in sheep with a social
implication. If a lamb is removed not only from its mother but
from all other sheep for the first ten days after birth, it loses its
sheeplike character of following the flock and does not develop
normal ties with it. The missing object here is not a mother
figure, though lambs in an early phase seem to be as sensitive
 to the lack of this as the human child is.
     Some investigators also believe they have found the key to a
 baby’s first smile in these impersonal ‘innate releaser mechan­
 isms’. Spitz found that a mask with two eyes and a nose waved
 slowly to and fro on the end of a broomstick, was enough
 to elicit the first smile, between the tenth and twentieth weeks of
 life, all smiles before that period being attributable to wind.
 But it is at least a permissible question whether this is ‘imprint’
 or association. It would be strange if, in ten weeks, the appear­
 ance of a face had not already become associated with smiling
 fortune in the baby’s mind. For the human brain, even at birth,
 is so highly organized, the electrical rhythms that sweep it are
 so suggestive of searching mental activity, that it is difficult
 amidst so much complexity to tell how soon the ape is left
  behind. The good fairy’s gift of learning by association is found
 in every cradle.
     We know that a new-born child can do three things, it can
  cry and suck and has already - shall we say, learnt to kick?
  Learning is just one jump - no more - beyond such natal activi­
  ties. Admitting that there is a kind of trigger learning linked
 122


===== PDF PAGE 123 =====

                                      Learning About Learning
to the earliest phase of life, there comes at least very soon an­
other type of learning - by repetition, which however varies
greatly in context Practice makes perfect in a great diversity
of circumstances. The essential here is that the response to a
stimulus ‘alters when it alteration finds’, as a- result of previous
experience with the stimulus. But we must go warily here. The
bed of a river is the result of such varied responses to flood-
waters; hillside and valley each year alter their responses to the
torrent as a consequence of previous responses. Do earth and
water between them ‘learn’ adaptation to gravity? Has an old
billiard table with nice easy pockets ‘learnt’ adaptation to the
balls? Is a car engine that is being run in ‘learning’ to do better
by repetition? Have your favourite slippers ‘learnt’ the form
of your feet? Such changes are neither unusual nor particularly
complex. To ennoble so common a process with the title of
learning would seem a degradation of our most prized attribute.
We should gain little knowledge and no credit by comparing
the pinnacle of human mentality with an old shoe.
   Yet we must acknowledge that, as we consider more elabor­
ate systems, the elementary simplicities of breaking-in and
wearing-out seem to merge imperceptibly into the mysteries of
growing-up and growing-old. In the latest computing machines
there are automatic processes which ensure that quick success­
ful methods of problem-solving are preserved, and lengthy or
inaccurate ones dismissed. Perhaps such mechanisms are only
dynamic examples of running-in, but they do contain the
essence of learning by repetition - with each delay or failure the
mechanism alters so as to reduce the tendency to hesitate or
fail in that way. again.
   The first failure is the beginning of the first lesson: learning
begins with failure. This is a hard saying for some people,
though the authors of Genesis understood it and Christian
doctrine holds the Fall to have been the beginning of Salvation.
Learning presupposes failure. It is only when there is a tend­
ency to do something and the creature fails - fails any number
of times - before it is successful, that learning can be of any
advantage.
   This is what is sometimes called trial-and-error learning, and
                                                                123


===== PDF PAGE 124 =====

The Living Brain
one may be tempted here to trot out the old refrain, ‘Try, try,
try again! ’ - and seek to define all learning in such terms. But
does an animal try? When you see a foal getting to its feet for
the first time, do you say it is struggling to its feet? Or do you
say it is trying to stand up? Is that its purpose, its aim? ‘Oh yet
we trust ... That nothing walks with aimless feet ..Some
purpose, some aim, is implied in the word ‘try’. But the foal
has no preconceived ideas about standing up, no image in its
brain to give its struggles purpose, no ambition to stand on its
own feet like the other fellows. It has a tendency to do so, a
tendency to use the feet it was born with in the way provided
by its inborn reflexes. It will stumble in its walk and play about
until all its motor reflexes are in working order; only the suc­
cessful ways of running, galloping, jumping, will be remem­
bered; and then, all being well, it will never stumble again. But
we cannot fairly accept the phrase ‘trial-and-error’ while unsure
about what is meant by try. Do your shoes try to fit? It is only
confusing to inject purpose casually.
   Learning by repetition, by rote, obviously plays a great part
in evolution : the animal which cannot learn by repeated experi­
ence - how to get its food, how to avoid or overcome repeated
dangers - does not survive. We must peer a long way back into
the past for any glimpse of its origin, back to what looks like
the first necessity for learning. The first lifelike but immortal
crystal-jelly floating in the primeval broth - not plant or animal,
the virus-animalcule, our first father, now our foe - accommo­
dated itself in an uncertain fashion to the release of pressure
in the cooling mould of life. As many giant crystals do, it may
well have taken many forms; and that it bred many fellows we
are here to testify. The liquid crystals that joined with harder
crusts of plastic skin were cells. But in these aeons of turmoil,
where and when can we discern learning? Adaptation or
accommodation to change and stress appears with the simplest
structures; in living crystals it is first seen as reproduction rather
than as reflection, the bud of evolution rather than the dawn of
 learning.
   No moment or species where learning starts can be identified;
 there was truly a slow dawn, a twilight epoch. As the numbers
124


===== PDF PAGE 125 =====

                                       Learning About Learning
of living things increased, as species and genera multiplied, as
the conditions of life became more varied, its hazards more
intricate, so the inherited equipment of any animal became
less adequate for survival, and adaptation by generation less
effective, The advantage began to pass from the great breeders -
shortlived, prodigal in sperm and egg, intractable creatures not
of habit but of heredity - to the layers of single eggs, the long-
lived docile wary beasts of the great migration. Young Diplo-
docus must have spent many long tropical days of playful
falling and flopping in the warm Triassic ooze, learning to
manage his tons of flesh and his unwieldy tail. And how many
crashes persistent Pterodactyl youth must have had before
winning their wings! Possibly one reason why the great Amphi­
bia lost their empery to these playful Reptiles was because the
young Mastodonsaurians neglected land sports, and the fate of
a race was decided on the playing-fields of the Permian.
   A very simple ‘trial-and-error’ reflex was built into one of
the toys described in the preceding chapter. The failures or
checks of M. labyrinthea, limited though they are, together
with their ultimate obliteration and the summation of successes,
give its performance a sequence typical of learning. M. specula-
trix, on the contrary, although in general behaviour more like
a living creature, does not learn to follow a light or to find its
way into a hutch. It is made like that. It does not learn at all.
It has no mechanism for the summation of experience, no
memory beyond the extremely brief and elementary one in­
cidental to its evasion or circumvention of obstacles. Its ways
are random, and that is why it seems so much more like a living
creature than any other toy. What is more random than the
ways of a kitten? Even in its play it is unpredictable; and in its
 play it is learning all the finer arts of feline chase and courtship.
Whereas Speculatrix, though he scans the scene unceasingly
 and seems to be looking for a bit of fun, never finds it. If he did,
he too would learn, and he would have a much better time than
 Labyrinthea has on its rails. But just because he is so free, if
 he is to learn to find the most direct way out of the room he
 would need a Learning Box as big as the room.
   Some of our own learning, even after maturity, is of the
                                                                  125


===== PDF PAGE 126 =====

The Living Brain
practice or repetitive kind. Learning your way home from the
station is a typical experience. But there are more varieties of
the type than most psychological theorists recognize. Their fav­
ourite example of a boy learning to ride a bicycle, for instance,
is an experience physiologically very different from the simple
case of a foal learning to walk. Here it is not a tendency that
is becoming effective, but a purpose that is being achieved. The
initiative is different and the mechanisms of the whole brain
are engaged; their concern with the matter subsides only after
the higher centres discover that conditioning has been effected
below. It would be difficult to take an eeg record of the wobbly
boy, but more stable examples of a similar process of learning
show very complex rhythmic effects in a brain so occupied.
   Repetition of any kind traces each time more plainly a pat­
tern in the brain, and in so doing affects other patterns through­
out the organ. If we knew what happens to the brain when
repetition does not mean learning, what happens in the brains
of workers bound to a single repetitive operation, we might be
reconciled to Wiener’s notion of replacing them entirely by
machines that cannot go wrong.
   In this discussion of learning by rote it has not been necessary
to introduce the notion of meaning. We have not had to ask
what the foot means to the slipper, the torrent to the river-bed,
or standing to the foal. We should not think of asking a parrot
what it meant, even if we heard it repeat a whole column of
the multiplication tables. But we might ask a child, and the
answer would show whether the learning had been repetitive
or analytic. When children are allowed to learn for themselves
the ‘meaning’ of multiplication, they are learning by association
of one operation with another. Meaning means association.
They are also learning to learn by association, and as all
higher learning depends on association of one kind or another,
they are likely to go further than children taught by mental
drill.
   Association comes early and easily to the human baby. It is
difficult to tell when it begins. It is manifest when the child
with no language but a cry begins to connect a certain sound
with a certain object. Learning of this type also depends on
126


===== PDF PAGE 127 =====

                                     Learning About Learning
repetition; but here we have the repetition of two outside events
which in certain circumstances have significance, a special
meaning. Here again there seems to be failure of a sort before
success, though it is rather uncertainty than failure. The baby
does not learn that the sound ‘ball’ means that familiar object
the first time it is heard. The repeated single event in learning
by rote must happen regularly and frequently, each repetition
coming within what might be called the effective interval. So
also must the two events for association, with a minimum regu­
larity and frequency. But here the likeness ends - the essential
quality of the repetition of the two events for association is
that they should occur each time more or less together. The
sound and the object will not be effectively associated - the
word will not come to mean the object - if they only happen
together occasionally, by chance, or so far apart in time or
space that the connexion between them is obscure.
  Learning by association is no novelty - the notion is as old as
thought - but the ways in which it happens were misunderstood
and misinterpreted until Pavlov undertook to measure them.
Pavlov has been neglected, travestied, reviled, and deified, but
the value of his observation and ideas is undiminished, provided
his work - or rather the many works of his school - be con­
sidered as a whole in the terms of the original context Pavlov
himself was, within certain limits of his period, insatiably curi­
ous, wide-eyed, broad-minded. In his own words, he was pas­
sionately devoted to the study of learning as a measurable
phenomenon and, perhaps most important of all, alert to the
possibility of the unexpected. In measuring the mechanics of
digestion, he noticed the influence of learning; investigating the
manner of learning, he came to appreciate the importance of
personality. At the time when our conditioned reflex laboratory
was in operation in Cambridge the most startling of the Lenin­
grad publications were on this subject - the identification of
personality differences between the animal subjects and the
elaboration of Pavlov’s theory of types.
   The Russian scientific workers realized at a very early stage
that all animals were not equal. Today they are constrained to
say that all are bom equal though, as George Orwell put it,
                                                              127


===== PDF PAGE 128 =====

The Living Brain
some are more equal than others. In the years of the Revolu­
tion, when floods and famine threatened both animals and
experimenters, as, singlehanded, he rescued the sodden and
starving menagerie, Pavlov noticed that some of his beloved
beasts were impassive in the face of catastrophe, others vio­
lently agitated, others again depressed. When work began again
the animals’ experiences were reflected in their conditioned
reflex measurements, each according to his kind. Furthermore,
the extent to which an animal could be aided by sedative or
stimulant drugs, Pavlov found, also depended on their type.
The ones he called ‘weak’, who were upset by disappointment
and crazed by disaster, were wonderfully soothed and strength­
ened by minute doses of sedatives - bromides were his only
stock. The ‘stronger’ types, unmoved or excited under stress,
were unaffected by these tiny quantities of sedative and merely
became drowsy with larger ones. From these gleanings of dis­
aster grew a complete theory of types, a theory so definitive as
to seem dogmatic, so liberal as to be ignored in the authorized
version and positively denied in the revised version of Pavlov
now embodied in Bolshevik doctrine.
   By unfortunate coincidence Pavlov chose as names for the
four commonest types of dog, the ancient terms of Hippocrates:
Sanguine, Choleric, Phlegmatic, and Melancholic. The first
three of these are varieties of strength, the fourth the embodi­
ment of weakness; their recognition depends upon accurate
measurement of three characteristics of behaviour, or, as we
should now say, three parameters: strength, balance, and versa­
tility. All these terms present great difficulties in translation;
Pavlov knew this and chose the hippocratic terms because he
felt they might be more intelligible than Slavonic ones, and he
disliked neologisms. Intelligible they were indeed, but in un­
fortunate association with an obsolete and sterile system of
 medicine. We can see now that it would have been far more
 helpful to coin new words, defined in terms of the three measur­
 able variables and to admit at the outset the existence of other
 rarer types.
    With three characteristics such as the orthodox Pavlovians
 recognized, all of which may be present in greater or lesser
128


===== PDF PAGE 129 =====

                                      Learning About Learning
degree, eight ‘types’ are possible. The Russian workers admitted
this, and in 1937 claimed to have found examples of them; the
rarer four seemed to represent natural neurotics. The four
types named so unfortunately by Pavlov are defined thus: San-
guine = strong, balanced, versatile; Choleric=strong, unbal­
anced, versatile; Phlegmatic=strong, balanced, unversatile;
Melancholic = weak, unbalanced, versatile. This sounded in­
genuous, arbitrary, and improbable as a physiological classi­
fication of types of learning behaviour, but in fact the demon­
strations which were given to us in Cambridge were convincing.
Rosenthal, who initiated us to these mysteries, was able to
predict to a few drops of saliva the behaviour of a fresh dog
in the conditioned reflex chamber, merely by playing with it
for a few minutes in a rather special way. For example, he
would snap his fingers till the dog came to him, then suddenly
would yell at the top of his voice; if the dog paid more atten­
tion to the louder noise it was strong, if it reversed its behaviour
and ran at the yell it was ‘weak’. Similar simple rule-of-thumb
tests sufficed to establish the characteristic point on the other
scales, hence to predict the type and the conditioned reflex
patterns.
   More impressive was the report of evidence which the
Russians had found, that these types were genetically deter­
mined; but the Mendelian characters responsible for them
were just being isolated, when Mendelism and typology both
were jettisoned at the command of the Russian Academy.
   This summary of some little known aspects of Pavlovian
physiology should demonstrate that the basic observations and
ideas were far more acute and flexible than those of synthetic
behaviourism. Analysis by types is still a reasonable method;
problems of personality and individual characteristics can be
approached quite safely in this way, for there are familiar
statistical techniques to warn of approaching dissolution from
types to tendencies.
   Pescribed in such laconic terms, the study of conditioned
reflexes would seem to merit the quip which Bernard Shaw put
into the mouth of the Black Girl: ‘Is it worth losing your own
soul and damning everybody else’s to find out something about
   L.B. -5                                                      129


===== PDF PAGE 130 =====

The Living Brain
a dog’s spittle?’ The matter goes deeper than this. First, there
is the enormous merit of measurement as opposed to casual
observation. It was partly to ensure accurate measurement
that Pavlov chose, out of all others, the salivary reflex for his
first studies. Measurement of such processes provides the
experimenter with an estimate of meaning - a talisman sought
diligently by students of semantics and others in the field of the
humanities. Second, the process of conditioning extends to all
levels and embraces all departments of bodily function. Once
he had established the general principles of conditioning, Pav­
lov and his colleagues turned their attention to many other
examples of association. His lead was followed in other
laboratories, chiefly in America, where Gantt, Liddell, Masser-
man, and others have studied the formation of conditioned
reflexes in many species of animal and in man. It must be
admitted that not all the followers of Pavlov have been able
to maintain the high standards of his technique. It is only too
easy to arrange a conditioning experiment - or to call an
experiment by that name - and neglect the first duty of meas­
urement. This is to fail to put the stamp on the letter, so to
speak; the information reaches its destination, but the reader
 must pay - in confusion and enhanced scepticism, which only
precision can allay.
   However varied the quality of such work, one fact of prime
importance emerges; there is no physiological limit to the
 power of association. For an animal such as man, anything
 that affects the nervous system can come to ‘mean’ anything
else. This association process in ourselves is so familiar that
 the industry of the later Pavlovians may well seem obsessional
 over-emphasis of the obvious. But our awareness is only a
 fractional measure of our associative powers; by far the
 greater part of this learning is below the water-line, submerged
 in what we may still call the unconscious. The salivary reflex
 that Pavlov studied is beyond voluntary control; we cannot
 dribble at will, or stop our mouths watering when we see a
 lemon sucked. By studying such a reflex in animals Pavlov
 ensured that his measurements would not be interfered with
 by what the animal might ‘want’ to do. He did not, and we
130


===== PDF PAGE 131 =====

                                     Learning About Learning
should not, assume carelessly that all animals act in human
fashion with conscious motives. We may find some proof that
will legitimize the use of these words for other than human
behaviour, but to introduce them unnecessarily begs questions
that cannot yet be answered.
   Involuntary functions of the body are, by definition, difficult
to study in oneself, and most people are content to leave them
alone. That we can safely do so is the end result of the evolu­
tionary process already outlined, the selection of types and
conditions in which the brain is liberated, in part at least, from
domestic chores. We do not have to manage our breathing or
our liver or the circulation of our blood. But, so intricate and
mutually dependent are all the functions of the body, we can
learn to control them if we really desire to do so. What is more,
and usually worse, any of these involuntary functions can learn
to control ‘us’ - that is to preoccupy, dominate, even finally
corrupt the integrity and placidity of our conscious person­
ality.
   The first set of these possibilities - conscious control of
usually involuntary functions - is the basis of grotesque cults,
commoner in Africa and Asia than in the Western world, in
which long years are spent in practising a system of conditioned
reflexes whereby the pulse rate, breathing, digestion, sexual
function, metabolism, kidney activity, and the like are brought
under conscious control. Strange feats are performed by adepts
- the heartbeat can be slowed and attenuated almost to vanish­
ing point, the body temperature can be reduced, breathing be­
comes imperceptible; the whole organism is reduced to the
state of a hibernating animal and can similarly be buried alive
for days. The reflexes which normally prevent intense pain can
can be diverted so that nails can be driven through the limbs;
the sympathetic nervous system can be induced to local activity,
producing pallor or flushing at will; and in the same way bleed­
ing can be prevented. The pupils can be dilated or constricted
so that visual impressions become inordinately brilliant and out
of focus or dim and sharp.
   Such feats are commonplace to the Yogi and in some coun­
tries they are an accepted source of income. The holy man on
                                                              131


===== PDF PAGE 132 =====

The Living Brain
his bed of nails is a figure of fun to Western eyes but he earns
his rice by conditioned reflexes, just as surely as a performing
seal earns his fish by playing God Save the Queen, or a medical
student his degree by knowing ‘what is meant by anaphylaxis’.
If one does not possess workshops and warehouses a new con­
ditioned reflex is a better investment than a better mouse-trap.
One who unconsciously exploits these possibilities we call
original; in the East the conscious practitioner is the fakir or
guru. Where economic conditions are highly developed the in­
ventor creates a material way of life, where they are backward
the fakir invents a state of mind. Both can be exploited and
both are dangerous to the less sophisticated members of the
community.
   Many of the achievements of Yoga have been studied and
imitated in the laboratory as measurable conditioned reflexes.
Physiologists have spent weeks learning to make their hair
stand on end or their pancreas secrete more insulin, and so
forth.
   The other side of the medal, the domination of the person­
ality by involuntary functions, is reflected in the clinic where
psychosomatic disorders plague the physician and delight the
psychologist. It has been claimed that in every ordinary illness,
even in the case of accidents and ‘bad luck’, there is a powerful
and subtle psychic element. Some disorders - ulceration of the
digestive system and heart failure, for example - are certainly
connected with the state of mind and influence it in turn. A
person who is worried - perhaps with good reason - about his
job, may start to feel pain in his stomach; the pain increases his
worry and so may complete what seems a purely vicious circle.
Before stigmatizing so influential and widespread a power as
vicious, however, we should recall that the hastened and more
dramatic failure of the individual does in some cases bring
about an earlier, more insistent appeal for help or mercy. On
the other hand many such miseries may be merely atavistic. In
our savage past, food was the first and most frequent anxiety. A
high blood-pressure and rapid digestion are conceivably advan­
tageous in a short hungry life, though they prejudice survival
in creatures whose troubles are more symbolic and protracted.
132


===== PDF PAGE 133 =====

                                      Learning About Learning
In the lean years foretolJ by the prophets these ancient associ­
ations may once more determine our vitality.
   Whether we encounter these phenomena as tedious labora­
tory experiments with dribbling dogs, as traditionally secret
physiological conjuring tricks, as an association of ideas, or as a
clinical malady, the same principles appear, the principles which
the Pavlov school have so abundantly established by repeated
measurement. They can be enunciated quite simply in the
terms of the original Pavlov experiment. Indeed this is the only
trustworthy way of considering the first principles, because if
we are dealing with a response or behaviour pattern which is
actually itself a conditioned response, we shall find confusing
relations which seem anomalous at first sight. In the simplest
Pavlov experiment, the first measurement is the amount of
saliva produced by a hungry dog when it is given a fixed
quantity of food. This is a measure of the reflex response, in­
voluntary, unconditioned, and remarkably constant. When this
quantity has been established by repeated observation, the dog
is provided with a new sensation, something which it has either
never had before, or has experienced only in situations where it
had no special significance. This may be any stimulus - light,
sound, touch, smell, taste - anything that affects the dog’s ner­
vous system, either through its senses or its blood or directly by
stimulation of the brain. For this stimulus to become associated
with the food-saliva reflex it must be given either with the food
or before the food; if the association is to be built up quickly,
food must never be given without the neutral stimulus, the
neutral stimulus must never happen without being followed
by food, and the neutral stimulus must not be given after the
food.
   The measurement of conditioned reflexes was an important
step in our understanding of how the higher centres work
together and negotiate with the rest of the body. But the
knowledge which these measurements by themselves can give
is limited - in much the same way as if Harvey had discovered
the circulation of the blood without asking how it circulates,
how is it made to circulate. Pavlov’s life was devoted to asking
the question, how much? He jumped at suggestions for more
                                                               133


===== PDF PAGE 134 =====

The Living Brain
accurate means of measurement wlien he was in England, but
disavowed any interest in the question of how the measured
events occur. And unfortunately his Russian disciples seem
content to follow him to the grave of research, repeating his
experiments without ever, so far as is known, asking them­
selves how it happens - how the animal decides that a signal
is memorable, meaningful, worth responding to - a decision
which must depend in some way on the relation between the
new neutral signal, the bell, and the specific signal, the food.
   How, then, does the brain decide that a particular pair of
signals is significantly associated, that the pattern-relation of
these two signals, among all those it is receiving, has some
special meaning?
   This question recurred years later, like an echo of Pavlov’s
visit, when the work stemming from Berger’s discovery of
brain rhythms reached a technical crisis - namely, with the
construction of the toposcope, described in the second chapter.
The extensive view of the physical phenomena of mental
events, seen simultaneously in tweny-two areas of the brain,
which the new apparatus provided, had taken us far beyond
the fragmentary bits of mirror to be found in the scribbling
of eeg pens. Many new lines of research were suggested by
the sight of its ‘trains of travelling sparks hurrying hither and
thither’. The mechanism of learning was one of them.
   Before developing this theme further, we may briefly recapi­
tulate some of the eeg features which can easily be shown to
 be related with mental states - though in a negative fashion -
and so with learning. The alpha rhythms are certainly associ­
 ated with the forms of ideas, with the nature of the images set
 up by the thinking brain. Recent experimental and statistical
studies have confirmed earlier claims that visual imagination
 and alpha rhythms are mutually exclusive. There is a similar
correlation between theta rhythms and pleasure. In many
normal adults and most children and psychopaths, the cessa­
tion of a pleasant sensation is associated with theta activity.
 In many cases this is in a highly stereotyped form - there is
 nothing so monotonous as frustration. The faster components,
 sometimes called beta rhythms, are well known to be common
134


===== PDF PAGE 135 =====

                                       Learning About Learning
in tension, whether acute or in the form of chronic anxiety
states. In considering the importance of scanning and the use­
ful results of flicker technique, it has been suggested that the
more regular familiar rhythms represent a process of hunting
for information. They are the repeated asking of a question;
their rhythmicity is a sign of the perpetual quest, their arrest
a mark of its ending. It is in the periods when rhythmic
activity is minimal that we should expect the closest corres­
pondence with mental states - and so indeed it turns out.
    The means for studying these basic electrical phenomena of
brain activity, of learning, are unfortunately intricate, expen­
sive, and hard to explain. We may regret this but we cannot
 avoid it. If method is to match the material of these problems,
 we must be resigned to complexity. But the mere possession of
elaborate instruments is not in itself adequate to raise the
 blockade on information; they must be allowed to work freely
 in a wide variety of conditions, and the statistical validity of
 the results must not be impaired by arbitrary selection of sub­
 jects or experimental arrangements. Where so little is known,
 any attempt at selection or control is more likely to be wrong
 than right. A further condition of success is that experiments
 should be unhurried. The term statistical in the foregoing sen­
 tence is of special and urgent importance, for the apparently
 irregular brain activities can only fall into patterns as a statist­
 ical effect.
    It is worth considering just what this means. If we take, say,
 a six-channel record so as to display the noise level of the ampli­
 fiers, all six channels will be carrying plentiful signals and no
 two will carry the same signal. At times there will be a brief
  appearance of rhythmicity. If now we pass such signals through
 a frequency analyser, the resulting spectra from all channels
 will show activity about equally in all bands, and successive
  analyses will be similar. If we analyse over a very long epoch
 the spectra will be the same; if we average the spectra over a
 number of successive short epochs and compare the average
  with the individual spectra, there will be little or no difference.
 The same applies to phases of signals in the various channels.
 We are dealing with a statistically homogeneous process - all
                                                                 135


===== PDF PAGE 136 =====

The Living Brain
samples give the same result if they are large enough. Our
truly random signals are statistically homogeneous in time,
frequency, phase, and space.
   Now if electrodes are applied to the head of a waking, alert,
normal person, we may obtain, at a higher level of amplitude,
a set of records which look superficially very like the record of
‘noise’. (See Figure 7.) But when we examine these records with
a frequency analyser or a toposcope we do not get the same
monotonous results. Certain frequency bands are more fre­
quently occupied than others; the momentary activity in several
channels has a consistent phase relation; an average over a long
period does not look like any of the samples from which it was
derived. In other words, we have a pattern which we can dis­
tinguish from noise only by comparing the statistics of its distri­
bution in frequency, phase, and space with the results we should
expect to get from a truly random ‘noise’.
   These concepts are not easy to grasp when unfamiliar. An
example from linguistics may clarify. The letters in this sen­
tence could be written down in any order: ehtr edros rette
lynan inisi htnwo decne tnesn ettir wdlu oceb. If sufficiently dis­
turbed, the letters lose their meaning; but in the rearrangement
given, the meaning can be deciphered quite quickly. A count of
letter frequencies would suggest that it was not a truly random
sample of letters - there are nine e’s, seven t’s, and so on,
whereas in a random set of fifty-two letters any letter of the
alphabet would only be expected to occur twice. And the longer
the message, the easier it would be to decipher it.
   If the eeg be considered as a cryptogram, the nature of the
problem is easier to understand. The rhythmic components are
the gaps and punctuation marks, common but quite meaning­
less in themselves; in fact they could be omitted from the com­
plete message without much loss. In order to stand a reasonable
chance of deciphering the eeg signals, we must make sure there
are enough of them and that the record is reasonably complete;
that is, the record must be long enough and taken with as many
channels as we can afford. Then, in order to decide whether the
signal is significant as opposed to noise, the quickest process is
to perform a series of frequency analyses; this will not tell us
136


===== PDF PAGE 137 =====

                                      Learning About Learning
what the meaning is but it will give us a good idea as to whether
there is meaning or not.
   If the frequency analysis is encouraging the next process is to
search for substitutions and transpositions - that is, to analyse
in terms of phase and space distribution. A further and quite
invaluable stratagem, flicker, has already been discussed. In
the cryptogram analogy this may be compared with forcing the
enemy to send a certain message. Obviously, if this can be done,
then the deciphering of other messages is likely to be easier
since the code will be known. The response of the brain to such
stimulation as we have described may be anything from a
simple elementary discharge at the stimulus frequency, to an
elaborate transformation of the stimulus rhythm into a wide­
spread fabric of intricate oscillations.
   With the toposcope it is possible at the same time to follow
the impression made on the subject by these procedures. Thus
the experimenter has three sets of data to correlate: the original
stimulus as a physical event, the cipher derived from this by the
brain, and the mental state evoked in the consciousness of the
subject. In these observations there is an encouraging corres­
pondence between the extent and complexity of the evoked
responses and the subjective sensations. As already noted, the
 more vivid and bizarre the experience of the subject, the
further from the visual areas are the evoked responses and
the more peculiar their form and geometry. This relationship
was obvious even in ordinary eeg records, but with the topo­
scope display the correspondence is more striking and the
details are more sharply outlined.
   The next feature is that both the evoked activity and its
spontaneous background are intricate in the literal sense; that
is, what looks like a single wave in a conventional record is
nearly always made up of several interwoven components.
The electrical structure is fabric-like, with the warp and woof
usually clearly distinguishable. It is hard to recognize activity
in more than two dimensions, but almost certainly there is a
 third, at least.
   What, then, is the function of these elaborate electrical struc­
tures in the economy of brain physiology? What process can
                                                               137


===== PDF PAGE 138 =====

The Living Brain
require so laborious a transformation? To what end does the
brain construct these transient fabrics of hard-earned energy?
   To answer this question we may ask another, easier to answer
but often neglected. What specific property has the brain that
other systems have not? Is the ‘great ravelled knot’ of the brain
different in kind, or only in size, from its stalk, the spinal cord?
   The answer is clear and opens a wide door to truth. The
brain can learn - no other structure can. So rare and so precious
is this learning, so delicate and so elegant is the electric weaving
we have seen, that to associate the two is more than tempting -
it is a marriage of necessity.


===== PDF PAGE 139 =====

      7
The Seven Steps from Chance to Meaning
      The world is either the effect of
      contrivance or chance; if the latter,
      it is a world for all that - that is
      to say, it is a regular and beautiful
      structure.
                Marcus Aurelius



After glancing at various types of learning in the last chapter
and considering some of them physiologically, two separate
paths of research were found to converge in a significant
manner. The problem of what is happening in the brain when
a signal or an event acquires meaning through association with
some other signal or event, was illuminated by the conjunction.
Of the two paths, far apart in source, one had started with
Berger’s discovery of electrical rhythms in the brain, the other
with Pavlov’s discovery that any bodily function can be made
the basis of a conditioned reflex and that one conditioned reflex
can be built on another. Both lines of research have yielded in­
valuable information, and each will continue to do so in its
own way. It is their convergence, however, which today seems
crucial in the evolution of brain physiology, because it brings
together, in a natural union, a mechanism of unknown function
and a mental activity as yet unaccounted for, both the mechan­
ism and the activity being uniquely and supremely attributes
of the living brain.
  At this point it might be thought that the course of future
inquiry would be plain - that, two main paths having con­
verged, there would now be only one to travel. It would be
convenient if scientific exploration could be conducted in this
manner, like tourists converging on Calais with the white cliffs
of home in sight of all. But scientific travel is not a home­
coming; we arrive only to depart; and a rare point of con­
                                                             139


===== PDF PAGE 140 =====

The Living Brain
vergence like this one has many more departure than arrival
platforms.
   Before going further, what has to be considered above all is
the condition of the vehicles in which we have arrived and the
character of the loads they carry. On the one hand there is a
great store of eeg equipment which is constantly getting new
information in spurts and flashes, but such that we can never
be sure just how the pieces fit together until the validity of each
piece is confirmed; on the other hand, a vast load of valuable
data, verified and classified but unused. Should these travel
together on one road, or separately on their own lines? Can we,
for instance, get eeg records that show the conditioning of a
reflex, and where would this take us?
   Some work of this kind has been reported from Russia and
France. Livanov and Poliakov, using normal rabbits, obtained
eeg records in which they found effects of the conditioning of

a reflex. (Incidentally their professional Russian translator,
faithful dictionary in hand, gave this memorable rendering of
‘a cascade DC amplifier with screened-grid valves’ - ‘a magni­
fier in the form of a smooth current waterfall fitted with shaded
lamps’.)
   Any record taken while an animal is going through any such
experience will certainly show not one but many strange pat­
terns and alterations of the rhythms. And this applies a fortiori
to records of human subjects. The difficulty is precisely in the
very multitude of effects which are observed. Among them no
doubt are the specific results of the particular experience. But
by what process of analysis can they be disentangled from the
rest? And would it, in any case, answer our question?
   Electroencephalography got off to a bad start because we
were mistaken about the apparent simplicity of the alpha
rhythm; and that, mainly, was because apparatus of excessive
simplicity was used. The same dangers are present whenever
the complexities of an experiment exceed the scope of the ex­
perimenter’s equipment. It is not quite clear from their reports
whether the Russian and French workers were fully aware of
this. With the toposcope, an instrument more appropriate to
 the intricacies of such observations, many effects of all kinds of
140


===== PDF PAGE 141 =====

                     The Seven Steps from Chance to Meaning
stimuli or signals have been watched, spreading from area to
area of the brain, but in such profusion that it must be some
time, as we have said, before these cryptographic messages can
even be classified for decoding. Travel on that road must con­
tinue slowly and methodically.
   Meanwhile there was the vast load of complete, verified, and
classified messages about conditioned reflexes only waiting to
be decoded. While convinced that more knowledge about the
rhythmic mechanisms of the brain will be necessary for a
proper understanding of the whole process of learning, we felt
we should be well on the way if we could ascertain what opera­
tions the brain must go through to arrive at some associative
meaning of a signal or other event. What is changing in the
baby’s brain while it learns the meaning of the word ‘ball'?
The question which Pavlov was reluctant even to consider,
which also, for lack of any information to the contrary, we
must regard as being either neglected or taboo among his
Russian disciples today, is this, namely, what happens inside
the brain when a reflex is being conditioned? How did the
rabbit get into the hat?
   Once again, as when faced by other problems of function,
guidance was sought by attempting to construct a working
model. Having already in M. speculatrix a model with mobility
governed by a reflex responsive to light, it was a simple addi­
tion sum to provide a second reflex circuit to be made re­
sponsive to sound. The further addition of a conditioning con­
nexion between the two reflexes should then make it possible,
for instance, to train the creature to come into the room at the
sound of a whistle, after teaching it that sound ‘meant’ light.
This turned out to be no operation in simple addition, how­
ever, but more like practice.
                Multiplication is vexation,
                Division’s just as bad.
                The rule of three, it puzzles me,
                And practice drives me mad.

   So the first trials made with the simple addition of the electric
circuits indicated were disappointing. It took some time to ap­
                                                                141


===== PDF PAGE 142 =====

The Living Brain
preciate the number and complexity of the operations involved
in the provision of a conditioning connexion between two
circuits. More information was sought. But in all the mass of
empirical data available there was no hint of the character or
number of operations needed. Obviously one of the principal
requirements for a process of associative learning must be a
complex mechanism of memory, capable of sorting the traces
of the two series of events to be related. Mechanical ‘memories’
are familiar devices. This one would have to be able to do more
than store information, however; there would have to be recog­
nition and registration of a coincidence between two events
which was greater than would be expected by chance - which
might be a matter of statistics. But with no other light than this,
it was difficult to envisage what the core of the problem was.
   An entirely new sort of approach seemed to clarify the pro­
position. The transmission engineer who has to design a tele­
phone system must first discover how signals can best be
distinguished from background noise. For comparing the
various devices at his disposal he has a useful trick. He gets a
lot of information about a transmission unit simply by com­
paring the signals that go in with the signals that come out. He
often calls the unknown unit a Black Box and undertakes to
determine its performance by measurements at its input and
output terminals, without looking inside.
   Our problem may be simplified then if we begin by consider­
ing the brain centres as a generalized transmission system into
which signals go and from which other signals come out. This
method advantageously permits the use of powerful statistical
means for ascertaining the simplest way of distinguishing im­
portant pairs of signals from random or meaningless ones. We
begin, as already noted, with a mass of dependable information
about the relations between effective pairs of signals that go
into the Black Box and the responsible signals that come out
of it. Let us consider briefly what are the exterior conditions
in which we know that two signals come to have a significant
effect, and how this knowledge can help us to get some idea of
what must be happening inside the Black Box.
   Study of learning in animals and man has shown that, what­
142


===== PDF PAGE 143 =====

                    The Seven Steps from Chance to Meaning
ever the final result of an association, some process of selection
must take place before any outward sign of learning appears.
In conditioned reflex experiments, the neutral stimulus - the
bell, for example - and the specific stimulus, the food, must be
given together a number of times before the new conditioned
response is established. For the first few trials, the animal may
seem ‘interested’ by the new experience, but no saliva appears.
If the bell and food occur simultaneously and regularly, after
ten or twenty trials the flow of saliva begins when the bell is
sounded alone. The size of the conditioned response is not at
once as great as for the food and in some animals is never quite
as great. These measurements provided two of the characters
that vary very much between individuals and help to decide the
‘type’ - namely, the length of time taken to establish the new
response, and the size of it when established, as compared with
the unconditioned reflex response.
   From such observations we can be sure that in the Black
Box, as well as the constructive processes of memory and asso­
ciation, there must be a preliminary selective process, an opera­
tion which can determine, in effect, whether a new signal is
worth bothering about. Every living creature is constantly bom­
barded with signals of all kinds. The brain of a human being,
however simple and uneventful his surroundings, is receiving
every second of his waking life several hundred sensory signals
from the outside world and from the rest of the body. Any or
all of these signals may have some important meaning in rela­
tion to any or all of the others. Yet somehow, for anyone to
learn the simplest things, those signals which occur regularly
in association with others of known or basic importance, must
be sifted out from all the others from the background noise of
life. In ourselves this process is often conscious, but it need not
be so. It is a common experience to see a strange word or name,
one thinks for the first time, and then to come across it shortly
after again and again. Nearly always in such cases it can be
shown that, in fact, the ‘strange’ word has been seen often
before but not in an important or interesting context; when it
appears in a more significant association, it is remembered and
learned as though it were fresh and meaningful. In a previous
                                                               143


===== PDF PAGE 144 =====

The Living Brain
chapter we discussed the significance of pattern - here we are
beginning to discern, as it were, the pattern of significance.
   In laboratory conditioning experiments, this selective opera­
tion could not be studied very carefully because the situation
was deliberately arranged in order to make the choice easy for
the animal. Pavlov’s early experiments were made with the
animals in stimulus-proof rooms - until he realized that for
many animals the lack of stimuli was itself a stimulus! There­
after the animals were only mildly restrained and could hear
and see random events, casual passers-by, the wind and rain or
sun; and provided these background stimuli were unrelated to
the test stimuli, the animals learned more quickly and main­
tained their response more uniformly. In human affairs, too,
there is nearly always pre-selection of important conditioned
stimuli. This is the value of a school. A teacher selects from all
possible stimuli those which he believes to be important, adjusts
the background conditions to a compromise between solitary
confinement and the market-place, establishes a set of uncon­
ditioned punishments and rewards, and exposes his pupils to
the association of conditioned and unconditioned stimuli as
regularly and firmly as convention permits. The importance we
attach to the pre-selection and segregation of school is a
measure of the inefficiency or inadequacy of the selective
mechanisms in our Black Box. Were these built-in selectors
perfectly efficient, we could learn all we need to by just letting
things happen to us.
    Most people would indeed maintain that the important
lessons are learnt out of school and that it is only our ‘artificial’
life that requires so much book-learning. If we had only our­
selves to consider this would probably be true, but in any
society larger or more intricate than a family, it is necessary
to learn not merely the facts of life but how these facts are
viewed by other people even far away and long ago. Necessary,
not merely desirable, because these opinions of others may be
as powerful and important in deciding one’s fate as the leap of
a tiger or the beat of one’s own heart. In the last chapter it
 was suggested that learning begins with failure - and that
practice makes perfect a successful change; now we may sur­
144


===== PDF PAGE 145 =====

                    The Seven Steps from Chance to Meaning
mise that teaching becomes necessary when the association of
events is too uncertain for the built-in guessing-machine of the
brain.
  Learning by association involves guesswork. How can the
Black Box guess? On what does it base its conjecture? Unaided
by a teacher, exposed to all the chance and change of an in­
different or hostile world, what feature does the Black Box
look for among all others?
  Here again the details of the conditioning procedure give us
an essential clue. If an association is to seem significant, the
neutral signal (say, the bell} must always be either simultaneous
with or precede the specific signal (the food). This is only like
saying that if the dinner bell is to be any use it must be rung
before and not after dinner. But the time relation between the
two signals - bell and dinner - is critical. If the neutral signal
appears a long time before the specific signal - that is, if the
bell is rung, say, an hour before the food comes on the table -
the sequence of the two signals will have to be repeated much
more often to give the former significance than if they are
simultaneous or there is only a short interval between them. It
might take you a number of days to realize that a bell had any­
thing to do with dinner if it only rang an hour before the event.
The next thing to note is that if, after the association has been
established, the coincidence of signals never happens again, the
memory of the association will fade away - that is, if dinner is
always late you will stop paying any attention to the bell. And
the memory of the association will fade still more quickly if the
bell rings and there is no dinner after all. We can recognize
such an experience in ourselves as a feeling of disappointment
or disillusionment.
   This relation between bell and dinner is not simple reversible
- ‘bell means dinner’ is not the same as ‘dinner means bell’. We
cannot apply our simple arithmetic to this relation. Thus, if,
after a conditioned response has been established, the food
appears without a bell, the conditioned response will diminish,
but at a different rate, and it can be re-established more easily.
We can feel this in ourselves, not as disappointment but as
indifference due to satiety. If we are well-fed, anyway, the
                                                              145


===== PDF PAGE 146 =====

The Living Brain
dinner-bell does not have any regular or insistent appeal; but
if we miss a meal the signal will become important, however
content we were to ignore it before.
   For most people awareness of these relations comes most
vividly from experience of training animals or watching their
performances. When an animal has done its trick it is immedi­
ately given a reward - usually food; when it comes on the stage
it is always hungry. The food must not be given before the
act, nor too long after it. But we all have seen some animals go
through trick routines without apparent rewards - the circus
horse is not ostensibly fed with oats or sugar, nor the lion with
hunks of meat There are two ways in which this can be done:
the first and more difficult is to establish a second conditioned
response alongside the original one - that is, to teach the animal
that a pat or an encouraging word means food and that doing
the trick means a pat - the proposition is then complete; if
trick, then pat, then food. The second way of dispensing with
immediate reward is to replace ‘if’ with ‘unless’; that is, to
punish failure instead of rewarding success. The punishment
need not be very severe. The claim of animal trainers and
 schoolmasters that ‘it’s all done by kindness’ may often be true;
 but it would be a hard task to break in a wild horse with lumps
 of sugar.
   Learning to associate two events when the later one of the
 two is painful, is sometimes called a ‘defensive’ reflex as op­
 posed to an appetitive one when the second satisfies an appetite.
 The distinction is not very clear since one might think of an
 association such as ‘if bell then food’ as equivalent to ‘unless
 bell - hunger’; and starvation may seem as stern a discipline
 as the whip. Most of us have been sent to bed without our
 supper, and some of us have been whipped; which was the
 more memorable, which did us more good, and which was the
 more cruel? Popular opinion is divided here - almost evenly
 divided.
    Human experiments are obviously impossible to devise, but
 animal ones have given fairly clear answers. If a neutral stimu­
 lus is given before a painful one and the pain is more than just
 discomfort, the association can be established by a single ex­
146


===== PDF PAGE 147 =====

                    The Seven Steps from Chance to Meaning
perience and need never be reinforced. This implies that the
avoidance of pain is, by itself, a sufficient unconditioned
stimulus, needing only an occasional formal reminder. A crack
of the whip or the whiff of grapeshot may be more potent and
more thrifty than reiterated rewards.
   There is one serious disadvantage of this system - its effec­
tiveness varies particularly widely with the type of subject,
whether animal or human. Pavlov found this at an early stage,
and everyday experience confirms it; there are children - and
adults - who can learn quickly the hard way, from one harsh
trial, and will never forget and will never resent the discipline.
But there are others not less numerous and as apt to mastery,
whose response to stem discipline is inverted and rebellious.
Many dogs who have achieved the highest degree of trained
competence in the laboratory by a scheme of carefully graded
and timed rewards, break down into surly treacherous curs
when punishment for failure replaces reward for success.
   This innate intolerance of retribution is associated in animals
with other features of what Pavlov called, with misleading dis­
paragement, “weakness’, a character typified also by an inverted
response to very powerful stimuli. If some selection board of
the future wishes to predict which recruits will respond best to
the glasshouse and which to promotion, they might do worse
than substitute a demolition charge for ‘Come to the Cook­
house Door’ - the men who can still empty their plates will
tolerate stripes on the back when they do wrong; the others are
likely to benefit more from having stripes on their sleeves when
they do right.
   Consider now in greater detail the mechanisms we should
expect to find in our Black Box. It certainly must contain a
good deal more than meets even the inward eye. Clearly, before
an association can mature, there must be a device to sort out
and select incoming signals on the basis of the order in which
they occur and the regularity of their coincidence. The end
result of this operation is to arrange pairs and clusters of events
in a scale of meaning; those that come in always exactly to­
gether and never separately will be at the top, those with
random irregular associations at the bottom. There is plainly a
                                                               147


===== PDF PAGE 148 =====

The Living Brain
statistical analysis; and if this seems too academic and pedes­
trian a conclusion we may add a tinge of romance - or squalor
- by noting that what we should expect to find just behind the
input terminals of our Black Box is a Bookmaker.
   What we are suggesting is that the brain must, quietly, unob­
trusively, incessantly, reckon the odds in favour of one event
or one set of events implying another. In the simplest, isolated
case, as in the laboratory, the odds are based on form - on the
past history of that particular twin set of events being con­
sidered, on how they have come in before. But in more complex
natural conditions the resemblance to the race-course becomes
even closer, for a creature may have a wide choice of events
and like any gambler can back a short odds favourite or take
a longer chance on an unpopular outsider. On the favourite -
that is, on the events that are obviously related - all backers
have some money; the rewards are small but fairly certain. On
the long chances there is less competition, more risks, a longer
wait, more anxiety, but the hope of a fortune. In the evolution
of living creatures can be seen the signs and effects of the
struggle for the daily double. The animals that are well adapted
and specialized - worm or fish, mighty lizard or mastodon,
those who for some epochs were lords of the earth - were
cautious backers of the dead cert; those whose nervous systems
lay fallow during long ages, subdued by their mighty neigh­
bours, starfish or newt, little furry creature or heavy-headed
ape, were all the time quietly developing a system to pick out
dark horses; and from time to time the meek did inherit the
earth.
1 returned and saw under the sun that the race is not to the swift nor
the battle to the strong ... but time and chance happeneth to
them all.

  Time and chance. We underestimated their part in the pro­
cesses of learning before we began to suspect that the brain is
a bookie and the Preacher’s God a mighty gambler. Our early
failures to confer the power to learn on our models were due
not merely to ingenuousness but to sheer ignorance of how
much dealing with time and chance is involved in learning.
148


===== PDF PAGE 149 =====

                    The Seven Steps from Chance to Meaning
   Finally, in the light of such ancient wisdom, and with the
more detailed knowledge of the statistical pre-selector given
by study of the learning brain as a Black Box, we were able to
specify the elements of its interior mechanism and to construct
a model embodying them. It was then found, in effect, that this
model could learn as animals learn, forget as they forget, and
even sulk and fret as animals do when things are too much for
them.
  The operations a model must perform can now be enumer­
ated. First, there must be a device to differentiate the beginning
of an unconditioned specific stimulus - the appearance of the
food in the simple example - from its continuance. This is to
ensure that a neutral stimulus which happens to occur during
dinner is not taken to mean dinner - otherwise we should
always be late for table. This is a straightforward operation
and can be represented diagrammatically. In Figure 9 is a
diagram of our Black Box in its simplest form, with two trans­
mission systems, T, and T2. Tt is the reflex which operates the
unconditioned specific response. S, is the specific stimulus -
the food, as it were - and E„ is the specific effect, the flow of
saliva. T2 is also a reflex, but neutral in relation to food and
saliva. The neutral stimulus S„ - such as the bell - may have its
own specific reflex effect E„2- pricking of the ears, say - but
with this we are not at the moment concerned. Our main prob­
lem is, what lies between the two reflexes in the Learning Box,
L?
  The first operation to consider is the differentiation of the
beginning of the stimulus S„. In the diagram, S„ is a sudden
prolonged change - the food appears and remains till it is
eaten. Below is drawn a modification of this stimulus which
ensures that its beginning alone is attended to: a brief pulse
of interest. Next, the neutral stimulus Sn - which, to be deemed
significant, must always occur before or at the beginning of
S„ - must have a prolonged effect. We do not say that it must
be ‘remembered’, for in this first group of operations, conscious
memory is a luxury - indeed an embarrassment. Accordingly,
Su must be extended or stretched, in time, so that its effect can
overlap that of the clipped, or differentiated, Sa. Note that the
                                                              149


===== PDF PAGE 150 =====

The Living Brain




                                                                 u
                                                                 PIPPRRBNTIATI ON

                                                                 SPECIFIC
                                                                 STIUULUS




            I | 1 .                                              UCTH.'fSIOK OF
 S
 n -------- * rr*--------------- —                               mmr~sTiwjLvs

       ______ ................................................
               •UXMORY I"


                                                                 3.




             TIME

                                                     Figure 9
  *... what lies between the two reflexes in the Learning Box?'
  The first four of the seven operations of learning - the selective
                            operations
150


===== PDF PAGE 151 =====

                   The Seven Steps from Chance to Meaning
longer the delay between Sa and S, the less trace there will be
left of Sn.
    The decision as to whether Sn and S„ are significantly related
depends upon the time relations between them; so the next
operation is to combine the abbreviated S„ and the protracted
Sn so that the extent to which they overlap in these forms can
be computed. In Figure 9 this is represented by measuring the
area common to the two modified signals when the first and
second diagrams are superimposed with their correct time
relations.
    The measure of significance also depends upon the number
of times S„ and S„ have been associated, therefore the next
operation must be to add up all the areas of coincidence that
have been observed from time to time, so that a consolidated
measure can be arrived at. Since, however, the absolute interval
between experiences is important, the significance attached to
each operation must be allowed to diminish slowly with time.
If the experiences are separated by too long an interval their
effects will not summate, since only an infinitesimal trace of
the previous experience will remain. The progressive building
up of the measure of significance can be represented as a graph
on which such coincidence is seen as a rise in the line followed
by a slow decline as its relative importance diminishes. If the
extent of coincidence is great at each experience and the experi­
ences are frequent and close together in time, the graph rises
 quickly to a given level. If the degree of coincidence is less or
 the experiences are less frequent or further apart, the graph
 rises more slowly and may never reach the threshold value.
    The next point is to decide what this threshold should be.
What is a ‘significant’ degree of coincidence in a series of
 observations? How close together must S0 and S8 be, how often
 must they occur, and how long can we wait between experi­
 ences? Here both everyday experience and formal statistical
 analysis come to our aid. Statistics indeed arose from just this
 sort of problem, from the study of games of chance, from
 gambling. If you were playing at double or quits for instance,
 with a chance acquaintance, how many times would^he have
 to toss a head before you would feel safe in accusing him of
                                                              151


===== PDF PAGE 152 =====

The Living Brain
using a double-headed penny? Common sense - your own store
of statistical estimates - tells you that you may often get three
heads in succession quite fairly; five, quite often; ten - rather
unusual; twenty - well, really; a hundred - never! What, never?
Well, hardly ever. This is where the difficulty arises - you can
never be absolutely certain that your suspected playmate is not
just extraordinarily lucky.
   This of course is the lure of gambling - there is no reason
why you too should not toss twenty heads in a row. At Monte
Carlo a number of roulette wheels have been spinning for many
years. As well as the numbers, there are several even-chance
features, red or black, odd or even, less than or more than
eighteen. Like tossing a penny, each spin of the wheel is inde­
pendent of the others; the way the ball runs one time does not
influence and is not influenced by the other spins. In the whole
history of such games there has never been a run of as many
as thirty in the even chance events. The Casino rules of play are
based on this. If there were no minimum stake and no
maximum, a gambler could wait for a run of, say, five blacks,
then put one franc on red; next time, if black came up again,
he would put two francs, then four, and so on. In this way he
could continue to double his stake and be sure that when at last
his colour came up he would win the value of his first stake. If
he had a run of ten adverse colours, he would have staked just
over 1,000 francs in the hope of winning one - a dull game.
 But if everyone played it, and there were no minimum and
maximum - and no zero - the bank would slowly but surely
lose. The ratio between minimum and maximum stakes is
 usually arranged so that, starting at the minimum for the table,
eleven or twelve doublings reach the maximum; one to a few
thousand. Since the limit is generally about an average pro­
fessional income for a year, the game is arranged so that by
the doubling method you may win the price of a packet of
cigarettes though be likely in the end to be ruined. Actually, the
best chance of winning is to put all one can afford to lose, once,
on one number - a thirty-six-to-one chance - and then, win or
lose, go away.
   How does this help to establish the odds that our Learning
152


===== PDF PAGE 153 =====

                    The Seven Steps from Chance to Meaning
Box must accept as significantly in favour of a series of coin­
cidences being more than chance? Leaving the race-course and
Casino, we may return to the laboratory to see what an animal
sets as a standard of significance. As already mentioned, in the
simple isolated conditioned reflex situation about twenty trials
are usually necessary before the new connexion is established.
In general, and allowing for differences between types and con­
ditions, the number of perfect coincidences an animal requires
before its brain says ‘perhaps’ is more than ten and less than
one hundred. So the mechanism which performs the first four
operations of learning, the statistical filter, may be adjusted so
that the threshold of significance is just attained by, say,
twenty experiences in which Sn and S„ are exactly coincident
and happen as rapidly as the response to S„ can permit. Thus,
whatever the nature of time hnd chance, at least our model
will be lifelike.
   As a further check on this estimate we can give one assistant
a key to press which delivers Sa and to another a key for Su.
The two operators, in separate rooms, are told to press their
keys as and when and as often as they like. The operators,
being independent of each other, provide a series of randomly
related signals; the statistical filter should only very rarely
build up the threshold value of significance from such an input.
Again, however, we can never be quite sure that by ‘sheer bad
luck’ even these independent sources will not turn out a series
of coincidences. But once more everyday experience is helpful.
Every day, without any thought of risk or danger, we take
chances of a million to one against violent death. In a month
of ordinary travel we accept with greater reluctance a hundred
thousand to one in our favour. At ten thousand to one we are
conscious of the risk, but take it none the less. At a thousand
to one against disaster we feel excited or indignant, according
to whether we happen to be at the wheel or on the roadside.
Risks of a hundred to one we expect to be paid well for, and
at ten to one we are decimated and can count on a decoration.
So if our Learning Box needs twenty bulis-eyes to get an idea
it must be so built and set that at the opposite extreme the odds
against it reaching its threshold by chance are greater than a
                                                              153


===== PDF PAGE 154 =====

The Living Brain
thousand to one. To maintain a lifelike attitude it must be
adventurous, but not reckless. But what if the neutral stimulus
S„ is kept on all the time, if one of our operators decides, as
his instructions allow, to keep his key pressed down all the
time? This obviously makes S„ meaningless, and we must
therefore arrange for Sn also to be effective only at the begin­
ning, though protracted as well to a degree decided by the
considerations we have just unravelled. It will be seen later that
this essential specification of Sn has important secondary con­
sequences when we consider how to look for the living pro­
cesses themselves.
   Assuming now that our Learning Box has thus built up the
threshold value of coincidence, the next operation is to transfer
the information - that S„ and S. seem to be associated - to a
long-term storage register. We can call this operation Activa­
tion. (See Figure 10.) Observation of animals suggests that it
is often abrupt, and in ourselves it may correspond with the
awareness of something having been learned, or with ‘getting
the knack’ of some problem.
   The next operation, which preserves the information of co­
incidence, may more legitimately be dignified with the title of
Memory. In this operation, too, provision must be made for
 the possibility of error - the association may have been chance.
So the memory must be allowed to fade quietly away if the
 supposed association never occurs again. It would never do to
have the whole Learning Box preoccupied with what might
 have been.
    The last operation is the combination of the memory with a
 fresh sample of S„. We may say that, once the preservation
 system is activated, it opens a gate through which a signal may
 pass from Su to have the effect of E, - and the reflex has at last
 been conditioned. (Figure 10.)
    No wonder our simple-minded experiments were of little
 avail! Who would have thought the Box had so much in it?
And all these stages are essential; if any one of them is left out
 our Box will imagine vain things - or nothing.
    To summarize, the first two of the seven steps from chance to
meaning are strictly selective; the second two are temporarily
154


===== PDF PAGE 155 =====

                    The Seven Steps from Chance to Meaning
constructive; the fifth is a trigger; the sixth a preservative; and
the seventh effective. In comparing experimental animals,
machines, and men, one must be duly cautious of meretricious
resemblance - mimicry is not explanation, and a model is not
a mould. But when more than three or four properties of a
system are known and the simplest possible model which could
reproduce these properties has been constructed, consideration
of the hypothesis, that the original contains components com­
parable with those in the model, is permissible.
   The next step is to test this hypothesis by prediction. Having
studied our Black Box and built up a model to act as we think
the Black Box must act, what other properties should we expect
the model to possess, from what we know of its components?
The complete circuit of what for short we call cor a, the
Conditioned Reflex Analogue, will be found in Appendix C.
cora grafted on to M. speculatrix produces a new species,
M. docilis, the easily taught machine, which behaves astonish­
ingly like an animal. It can be taught to come to a whistle by
blowing a short blast and showing it a light - light in A/.
speculatrix eliciting an unconditioned reflex of attraction. This
must be done fifteen or twenty times within a few minutes
before any new effect is produced. If the whistle is blown all
the time it has no effect; and the light too must not be on all
the time. There is no effect of course if the whistle is blown
after the light is shown. If the whistle is blown half a minute
before the light is shown, conditioning may take hours. Once a
new response has been established it fades away if it is not
reinforced from time to time; and if we tease the creature by
blowing the whistle without the light, the response will diminish
more rapidly, though a latent memory may persist.
  So far, so clear: we have reproduced nine or ten of the features
of animal learning by arranging three vacuum tubes and sundry
other components so that they perform seven operations. This
is a promising analogy but, so far, no more. We could have
made the whole thing from clockwork or chemical reactions;
the electrical basis of the model should not in itself prejudice
us in its favour. It is compact, economical, and does all we
expected. But does it predict anything? Does it contain other
                                                               LS3


===== PDF PAGE 156 =====

The Living Brain
properties than those we found necessary to specify its simplest
design?
  In experimenting with M. docilis we soon tired of the sound-
means-light trick and decided to teach the model that sound
means trouble. This we did by connecting cora to the obstacle­
avoiding device in M. speculatrix, the feedback circuit which
made that simple creature back and turn when its shell was
              1                                     i.
                                                    ACTIVATION




                                                   6.
                                                   PRESERVATION Of




                          •MEMORY 3"               7.
                                                   COMBINATION Of
                                                   PkxssfcVEb Vracb




                             Figure 10
 ‘What becomes significant ...is a private image ...an idea.'
The last three of the seven operations of learning - the constructive
                             operations


===== PDF PAGE 157 =====

                    The Seven Steps from Chance to Meaning
touched. Its education by punishment consisted of blowing the
whistle and kicking the shell a few times. The electrical signals
thus generated are much larger than those produced by light,
so fewer experiences were needed. After five or six beatings,
whenever the whistle was blown the model backed and turned
from an ‘imagined’ obstacle.
   Then came the first unexpected confirmation of the similarity
hypothesis - it could have been foreseen, but was not. The
activation operation in cor a consists of a brief discharge in a
miniature neon glow tube - it is seen as a flash of pink light.
Now when we were trying the effect of blowing the whistle after
the defensive reflex had first been conditioned, we saw, without
reinforcement by kicking, the flash of light which indicated
that the memory circuit had been activated afresh without the
specific stimulus. This had never happened of course with the
sound-means-light reflex; but the circuit is a probability ana­
lyser - it could happen by chance. But every time the whistle
blew and the model dodged its imaginary impediment, the pink
light flashed. Then we realized that so it must turn out; the
defensive reflex involves an internal feedback circuit in which
signals circulate from the output to the input of the light ampli­
fier. This means that M. speculatrix can pay no attention to
lights when it is dodging an obstacle, but it also has the con­
sequence that, when it has learnt that ‘whistle means dodge’, its
very dodging instantly sends a specific signal back into cor a,
and the memory of the learned response is automatically rein­
forced. The defensive reflex does not require specific reinforce­
ment - exactly as in the animals and ourselves. Had nothing
been known about the main difference between appetitive and
defensive reflexes, of the relative value of reward and punish­
ment, it could have been predicted from the uncalculated
behaviour of the model.
   Another test of the fitness or goodness of fit of the model is
that, if added frills extend the inventory of accessories, the
lively extravagances of animal and human experience should
snugly fill out the swelling fabric - the flesh should match the
metal, not in Procrustean fashion but as to the nature born.
This is confirmed when more degrees of freedom are added to
                                                              157


===== PDF PAGE 158 =====

The Living Brain
M. docilis. The simplest model provided for only one con­
tingency at a time - ‘sound-means-light’ or ‘sound-means-
dodge’ - and we assumed no impediment to its realization. But
there is a possibility that in some other circumstances we may
have to weigh novelty against custom or consider the less
familiar proposition that light means sound or touch means
sound. This situation is more easily envisaged if we consider
first the reflex, built-in effect of sound. It was mentioned that
the neutral stimulus, the sound of the whistle, might have a
direct effect of its own. In a real animal a sudden sound would
in fact be likely to evoke some reflex action; commonly an
animal will ‘freeze’ to a sudden sound. We can, therefore, with­
out loss of superficial realism, and obeying our accepted laws of
mimicry, connect the output of the sound amplifier to the relays
controlling all the motors in the model, so that when the whistle
is blown all the power is cut for ten seconds or so, and the
model cowers motionless and silent, ‘plays possum’ for this
period, then crawls quietly away. Now, when the attempt is
made to establish the conditioned response, sound-means-light,
we find that we must add an inhibitory link from the final gate
of the Learning Box so that the newly significant positive
association shall not conflict with the reflex inhibition of all
movement. Thus we have introduced ‘inhibition of inhibition’.
   But the model with this character is not quite so perfectly
docile as the original and a new possibility of variation is pre­
sented. The threshold for ‘freeze’ may be made higher or lower
than that for the conditioned response. If it is made higher,
then the acquired association will be prepotent - after training,
sounds of ordinary intensity will always be attractive, though
very loud sounds are likely still to evoke immobility. If the
reflex threshold is lower, ordinary sounds will remain inhibitory
but loud ones can become attractive.
   In practice the setting of these thresholds is very critical and
varies with wear and tear and the state of the model’s batteries.
Such models show inexplicable mood changes. At the begin­
ning of an experiment the creature is timid but accessible, one
would say, to gentle reason and firm treatment; later, as the
batteries run down there is a paradoxical reversal of attitude;
158


===== PDF PAGE 159 =====

                    The Seven Steps from Chance to Meaning
either the reflex or the acquired response may be lost altogether,
or there may be swings from intractability to credulity. Such
effects are inevitable; however carefully the circuits are de­
signed, minute differences and changes are cumulatively ampli­
fied to generate temperaments and tempers in which we can see
most clearly how variations in quantity certainly do, in such a
system, become variations in quality.
   When, having sampled the possibilities of a single Learning
Box, another is added to provide for the reversed contingency
already contemplated, we observe many strange things. We can
now establish the association sound-means-light as before, or
light-means-sound, or touch-means-sound. For the first associ­
ation the response is ‘go to sound’; for the second, ‘freeze to
light’; for the third, ‘freeze when touched’. Now suppose we
establish the ‘sound-means-light’ response, but, while the re­
sponse is being carried out, we rebuff the creature’s advance
to the confirming light with a kick, and repeat this from time
to time. We are building up the association ‘touch-means-sound,
so freeze’. But once this conflicting contingency has been estab­
lished, we find that any stimulus entering the transmission
system for light will have the same result as a sound-paralysis.
In trying, as it were, to sort out the implications of its dilemma,
the model ends up, ‘sicklied o’er with the pale cast of thought’,
by losing all power of action. It is no longer possible to tempt
it by gentle light to its feeding hutch where its batteries can be
charged; nor can a sound mean light, for any attempt to rein­
force this original lesson will itself induce a palsy. Of course,
were the model an engine for guiding a projectile or regulating
the processes of an oil refinery, this tendency to neurotic depres­
 sion would be a serious fault, but as an imitation of life it is
 only too successful.
   In laboratory experiments, conflicting incentives and penal­
ties have been studied with industry and imagination by the
 orthodox Pavlovians; also by Masserman in Chicago who, as a
 psychiatrist, was deeply interested in the sources of mental
 pain. In cats, he found, quite elaborate responses can be incul­
 cated when food is the reward. A normal cat can learn to press
 a bell three times to get its food delivered, but if then a puff of
                                                                159


===== PDF PAGE 160 =====

The Living Brain
air is directed at the cat’s face as it darts to the food, the situa­
tion changes dramatically; its manner quickly becomes sulky
and suspicious, its skill is lost with its appetite. Often it turns
its indignation to the bell-push it once manipulated so deftly,
and scratches and bites it. Many cats refuse to feed, grow thin
and ill, and would die rather than submit to the doubt and
indignity of the harmless puff of air; an insulting reproof in the
pay packet has caused many a strike. Masserman was most
intrigued to find that in most cats a few drinks would dissipate
these fine airs. The discouraged animals soon learned to pick
out the hard liquor from the soft drinks, and attacked their
food trough with abandon. But unlike some humans, once they
had broken down their mental barrier, they could take their
liquor or leave it.
   Such transformation can be imitated with great fidelity by
cora, as can the other everyday observations of psychiatrists.
When a complex learning model develops an excess of depres­
sion or excitement, there are three waiys of promoting recovery.
After a time the conflicting memories may die away - except
in obsessional states based on defensive reflexes, which as we
saw earlier tend to be self-sustaining. Switching off all circuits
and switching on again clears all lines and provides, as it were,
a new deal for all hands. Very often it has been necessary to
disconnect a circuit altogether - to simplify the whole arrange­
ment. Psychiatrists also resort to these stratagems - sleep,
shock, and surgery. To some people the first seems natural and
benign, the second repulsive, and the third abhorrent. Everyone
knows the benison of sleep, and many have been shocked into
sanity or good sense; but the notion that a mental disorder
could be put right by cutting out or isolating a part of the brain
was an innovation which roused as much indignation and
dispute as any development in mental science. There are
volumes of expert testimony from every point of view, but our
simple models would indicate that, insofar as the power to learn
implies the danger of breakdown, simplification by direct attack
may well and truly arrest the accumulation of self-sustain­
ing antagonism and ‘raze out the written troubles of the
brain’.
160


===== PDF PAGE 161 =====

                    The Seven Steps from Chance to Meaning
   Some reference, necessarily superficial, has already been
made to the relative numbers of brain cells and brain functions.
If N represents the number of functions, then, to be capable of
learning any sort of contingency or association between any or
all of these functions, we must have Na N learning boxes.
It was suggested that the number of elementary brain functions
may be of the order of 1000, and each of these may need about
 100 cells to provide for the average range of intensities and
amplitudes of sensation and performance. For these 100,000
elementary functional departments to have full scope for learn­
ing about one another’s experience, starting with the ‘anything
may mean anything’ assumption, the necessary learning links
just about account for the number of cells we usually have in
our heads.
   If such a system were really in the least like M. docilis multi­
plied by a factor of a few thousand million, it could not work
long or well without several precautionary and safety devices.
There is the danger of everything seeming to imply everything
else and nothing being what it seemed. How such risks may
in fact be guarded against without reducing too drastically the
power of association will be discussed later. But considering
our models, we can find some encouragement in the figures of
‘nervous breakdown’ in ourselves. In most countries, one in ten
of the population needs or seeks expert attention for mental
trouble at some time, and a much higher proportion takes some
mild treatment or medicine - a rest cure, sedative, stimulant.
So, comparing metal with flesh, it is not necessary to design
for a factor of safety; as in the case of a military aeroplane, to
be overstressed is better than to be overtaken. We must accept
with resignation and, if we can, with approval of its clean lines,
a design of brain such that one in ten can never get home, even
from a practice flight of fancy.
   Perhaps the most intriguing, unexpected, and essential of
cora s complexities is that three types of ‘memory’ are de­
monstrably needed. The extension of the neutral stimulus is the
first; but this is only in the nature of an after-discharge, not
necessarily very different from the prolongation of the response
seen in spinal reflexes, the effect that ensures that if you step on
    L.B.-6                                                       161


===== PDF PAGE 162 =====

The Living Brain




                             Figure 11
           \ .. three types of “memory” are needed.’
The three types of memory:
(a) Prolongation of the effect of a neutral stimulus equivalent to the after-
    discharge.
(b) Summation of the combined effects of neutral and specific stimuli over
    a series of experiences.
(c) Activation and preservation over a long period, of information about
    the significant coincidence between neutral and specific stimuli.


===== PDF PAGE 163 =====

                    The Seven Steps from Chance to Meaning
a tack, and your leg reflexly withdraws, it does not immediately
come down again in the same place. (See Figures 9, 10, 11.)
The second memory provides for the gradual accumulation of
the separate overlaps between neutral and specific stimuli. This
is on a much longer time scale; in cora or an animal it might
have to last for days or weeks, but must decline slowly in the
intervals between experiences. In an electronic circuit a con­
denser is a convenient store; in the human brain some other
mechanism may be far more compact and economical. A
chemical change similar to the charging of an accumulator
would serve, or a physical one such as microscopic growth at
nerve endings.
   The third memory is on a different scale again; in cora it
is an electrical oscillation at low frequency which subsides
slowly over minutes or hours. This again is convenient for the
model-maker, but does not necessarily represent the physio­
logical truth. A swinging pendulum would have done the trick
for the clockwork automata of Jaquet-Droz. In the brain,
oscillating circuits have been imagined and some think identi­
fied; certainly we see oscillations in abundance in our eeg
records. Whether these are due to ‘spontaneous’ rhythmic dis­
charges in nerve cells, as Bremer believes, or require feedback
circuits from cell-group to cell-group, they have many of the
properties that memory requires.
   Recalling Hartley’s ‘vibratiuncles’, we may speculate on the
specific virtues of an oscillating store. It is not a thing, but a
process; not a penny lying in the plate, but a candle burning
at the altar. Being dynamic it can open the gate to action - as
our seventh operation demands - and having a frequency it can
be traced and tagged with a number. Also, it can be evoked -
the memory can be recalled - by memories which have similar
frequencies, and the similarity can be quite adventitious. This
promotes the use of mnemonic tricks and suggests an explana­
tion of the idiosyncrasies and vagaries of word association.
When there are many Learning Boxes, their various third
degree memories can be combined in a master store as a com­
plex waveform, a templet, as it were, for an experience.
   All very well, one may say, for a model or a computing
                                                              163


===== PDF PAGE 164 =====

The Living Brain
engine, but is there any evidence of such a mechanical basis
for memory in the brain itself?
   In Chapter 4 some surprising effects of rhythmic stimulation
with light were described. In some patients, in states of mental
strain, a frequency of flicker can be found at which overpower-
ingly vivid memories of past experiences suddenly appear. The
frequency of stimulation is often most critical. At 18 flashes per
second perhaps the patient is overcome with a memory ‘as
clear as crystal and as bitter as gall’, and the brain is almost
convulsed with electrical discharges; at 18-5 flashes per second
the tempest abates; at 19 all is quiet. This can sometimes be
repeated time and again, but usually, when the mental state
improves, the effect disappears. Repetition is not always easy
to test, because the- patient remembers remembering and asso­
ciates the experiment with the distress, so that control passes
from the physiologist to the psychiatrist.
   No doubt in some people some memories may be local and
material, or at least mechanical. The observations of Penfield
on the effect of stimulating the brain during operations are
intriguing; when certain small regions of the temporal lobe
were stimulated some of his epileptic patients have been con­
strained to remember in vivid detail long scenes, tunes, ac­
quaintances’ voices, and to go on remembering them again
and again. But when this part is removed, the memory is not
amputated; which suggests again that memory is not a place
but a process.
   For those who are repelled by the spurious magic of the
Number Seven, we may postulate, though we cannot prove,
an eighth operation in the learning process responsible for the
lifelong storage of the unforgotten and perhaps unforgettable
memories. In a model this would be similar to the latching
‘memory’ of M. labyrinthea, though in the living brain a
chemical lock would be more elegant. We must suppose that
the gate would be wedged permanently open after repeated
confirmation of the hypothesis preserved by the sixth operation.
   The parts of the brain from which memories are evoked so
easily and regularly are those we find most liable to exaggerated
electrical discharge during flicker, and it is here too that in
164


===== PDF PAGE 165 =====

                    The Seven Steps from Chance to Meaning
normal subjects the pattern of incoming stimuli can be seen
abstracted and preserved for some time after the stimulation
has ceased.
   Multiplication of Learning Boxes has one particularly import­
ant consequence which is fundamental to our notions of brain
design and to interpretation of electrical records from the living
brain. The scheme of learning elaborated here involves two
main groups of operations, one selective and the other construc­
tive. In the latter group, the change of state induced by a series
of observed coincidences in no way resembles the coincidences
themselves; it is a formal, symbolic change, a signal of signals.
When several such mechanisms are operating together in
parallel and in series a new aspect of the constructive process
emerges - abstraction. The several learning circuits are really
extracting from a selection of events the features that are
common to them in time and space - they are, in effect, recog­
nizing a pattern. It was found in a previous chapter that pattern
is hard to define except as something memorable; here, starting
from a different standpoint, we have reached the same con­
clusion - the raw material of learned behaviour is symbolic
abstracted pattern. Turn again to the diagrams in Figure 10.
What becomes significant, after statistical selection and con­
structive preservation, may be very far removed from the
nature of the original incoming signals; it is a private image of
their relations to one another - an idea.
   A natural question at this stage is: are we discussing what
has been observed in these models or what may be happening
in a living brain? Of course we are considering both, hoping
that the explicit clarity of the first will illuminate the implicit
obscurity of the second. Figure 12 shows how the seven opera­
tions of learning, inferred from first principles, could be per­
formed by an assembly of nerve cells. Four types of nerve junc­
tion must be assumed, and junctions with the necessary pro­
perties are familiar. The electronic circuit which would be the
precise equivalent of this neuronic system is given in Appendix
C.
   From ■-tudy of the models, then, we can predict what a living
system should look like from the outside while receiving and
                                                               165


===== PDF PAGE 166 =====

The Living Brain
operating upon incoming signals. Since we designed the model
to reproduce the features of animal learning it is not surprising
that there are in fact superficial resemblances. But are there
also more intimate subtle similarities? Have the electrical
changes in the brain during stimulation any properties that
our models also have? First, the statistical selective operations
demand that every signal entering the brain should be turned




                               Figure 12
 .. how the seven operations of learning could be performed
               by an assembly of nerve-cells.’
(a) Conventional signs for indicating the four types of nerve junction
     necessary for learning, used in Diagram (b).
(fe) The simplest neurone circuit which could perform the seven operations
     of learning.

into two derivatives, one clipped and shortened with respect to
time, a signal of change and beginning, the other also clipped
so as to ignore continuity but stretched at the same time, out­
lasting the signal if it is brief. The first derivative is important
in case the signal turns out to be implied by something else,
the other extended form in case it implies something. Both
these forms should be found far from the brain receiving zones
where the signals first arrive - indeed they should reach nearly
every region, ready to be mixed with any other signal with
which they may tend to coincide. They should be transmitted
to all departments ‘to whom it may concern, for information
only’. We should not expect these secondary responses in the
166


===== PDF PAGE 167 =====

                    The Seven Steps from Chance to Meaning
brain to be very large, for they have low physiological priority;
they are not even memoranda until their significance has been
established - they are merely propaganda.
   The need for indiscriminate, widespread bodily reforms and
warnings, more insistent than the detailed intermittent propa­
ganda associated with systematic learning, may be met by the
ancient and intricate system of ductless glands, the endocrine
system. These mechanisms are effectors, producing, instead of
muscular movements, chemical messengers, the hormones,
which circulating in the blood-stream initiate and control many
processes connected with growth, metabolism, sexual activity,
and preparations for fight or flight.
   One of the best ways of getting miners quickly out of a dan­
gerous mine is to break a stink-bomb in the air intake to the
ventilation pumps. Similarly in the body the nervous system can
revolutionize in a few seconds the whole internal economy of
the body by activation of the adrenal gland, evoking as it does
so feelings of anxiety and tension as the organs affected are
mobilized for action and signal their readiness back to the con­
trol. As already suggested in connexion with long-term memory,
specific chemical changes may well play a more subtle and dis­
criminatory part in the reinforcement of the propaganda policy
worked out by the learning mechanisms in relation to their
experience.
   Until the introduction of sensitive and discriminating elec­
trical methods of analysis the search for physical evidence of
these signals would have been vain. Experiments on an­
aesthetized animals are for this purpose of course quite futile -
anaesthesia means not perceiving; and the human eeg is so
attenuated by the skull and other intervening tissues that we
can detect the electrical behaviour only of large clumps of
brain-cells with ordinary records. But the combination of
rhythmic stimulation by flicker, with automatic and toposcopic
analysis of frequency and location, extends the resolution of
the recording system by a factor of ten or even a hundred.
Actually, such an apparatus has properties not unlike those of
the brain itself in that it distinguishes more clearly between
regularity and randomness.
                                                             167


===== PDF PAGE 168 =====

The Living Brain
   When we started to analyse records from subjects under­
going stimulation by flickering light we were at once struck by
the complexity and dispersion of the evoked electrical changes.
The character of these responses and their relation to the sub­
jective feelings of the subjects have already been described;
their significance puzzled us for some time and was rather
neglected in favour of the more dramatic and clinically valu­
able effects produced in epileptics by the same procedure. As
long as we were restricted to analysis of frequencies in conven­
tional records we felt some lingering doubt about the reality of
these widespread and variable evoked responses. In certain
conditions, frequency analysis can give misleading or at least
ambiguous results. However, when toposcopic methods came
into operation we quickly realized that the secondary responses
have a very real existence and must be accepted as a significant
though variable feature of normal brain physiology. An experi­
ment which can never be repeated does not appeal to the
laboratory experimenter, but it slowly dawned on us that the
fluctuations we were inclined to dismiss as inordinate experi­
mental error were the heart and substance of the remote effects
 of rhythmic stimuli. Again and again during a toposcopic study,
the screens would light up in a brilliant pattern of interlaced
gleaming threads as the flicker was turned on; then, when we
had adjusted our controls and prepared to photograph the dis­
play - all would become drab and inconspicuous. Sometimes
 again the startling effects would come at the end of the experi­
ments, when the subject was feeling tired and uncomfortable.
 No two people behaved in the same way, nor did any one sub­
ject give quite the same picture on two occasions.
    Careful study of such records as we did succeed in snatching
 from these momentary conflagrations showed that there were
 at least two effects. One, most prominent at the start of the
 stimulus, was in the nature of an ‘on effect’, a brief spike ap­
 pearing in many areas, a disseminated transient. The other was
 more complex and long-lasting but equally widespread - a
 train of diminishing waves, like the rumble of thunder after a
lightning flash. Similar effects have been seen in experiments
 on animals but in a more restricted distribution; the response
168


===== PDF PAGE 169 =====

                    The Seven Steps from Chance to Meaning
even of a primary receiving area is neither simple nor regular.
In a conscious normal human subject the secondary derived
components may overshadow the primary elementary ones -
but only for a time.
   It was partly in order to account for these observations that
the analysis of learning was undertaken; not until the analysis
was complete and its implication was realized, however, did an
explanation of them present itself. These evanescent, widely
disseminated responses are of course just what our theory of
learning requires: their transitory quality is a sign of the in­
significance, the meaninglessness of the flicker itself. When the
stimulus is first presented, as far as the subject is aware it might
imply anything - or be implied by anything; but as flash suc­
ceeds flash in monotonous series, the possibility of significance
is dismissed. That is, unless the whole situation takes on a
peculiar character - of pleasure or discomfort. Then the re­
sponse may augment and spread and the subject complain that
‘the light makes my head ache’, drawing a reasonable con­
clusion of causality which experiment shows to be false. But
the relation between repeated coincidence and causation must
be discussed later.
   Consideration of normal flicker responses in these terms led
to a renewed study of the exaggerated and apparently anom­
alous effects found in many epileptics and some normal sub­
jects. At first, it seemed that these evoked discharges should be
a perfect testing ground of the learning theory, since they repre­
sent in the brain an event of gigantic magnitude, a bomb to a
squib as compared with the ordinary effects. But these electrical
experiences, however impressive their scale, proved astonish­
ingly intractable to conditioning. It was only in one or two sub­
jects that a loud sound, regularly repeated just before the flicker
was started, would eventually evoke or facilitate an unusual
response, provided that the original flicker response was an
exaggeration of only one normal feature. Those subjects who
displayed both fast and slow components to excess during
flicker might never have heard of Pavlov or Yoga.
   Considering how easily obscure and unobtrusive bodily func­
tions can be conditioned, it was disappointing that a major
                                                                169


===== PDF PAGE 170 =====

The Living Brain
event in the brain itself was so inaccessible. But an explanation
now seems fairly obvious. The abnormal effects may be signs
of disorder or weakness in the parts of the brain responsible
for the third and fourth operations of learning, the mixing and
summation of specific and neutral stimuli. If this is so, naturally
the one physiological activity that cannot be conditioned is a
fault in the conditioning mechanism. You cannot learn not to
learn.


===== PDF PAGE 171 =====

     8
Intimations ofPersonality
                          Children use the fist
      Until they are of age to use the brain.
             Elizabeth Barrett Browning



The physiologist of a generation ago, baffled by the com­
plexity of brain mechanisms, would have been doubly reluctant
to enter the territory now reached in the study of them. Those
were the days when the specialist was in the ascendant and won
golden opinions precisely by keeping to his own field, days be­
fore physician and psychologist put their Jovian heads together
to produce the psychiatrist. The physiologist of that period was
a shy fellow, having indeed little to contribute to the Minervan
synthesis. He was more concerned to retain and advance the
claims of physiology as an exact science, content to be the ser­
vant of the practitioner rather than his partner. Consequently
his public repute remained similar to that of the physicist in the
days when physics only came into the school curriculum as a
stray half-hour of ‘Heat, Light, and Sound’.
   So far this account of the brain has been traditional in scope
if not in matter; that is, brain has been considered in general
terms, as might have been heart or liver or any other organ, as
if it were anybody’s brain, apart from some passing references
to typical variations. This common character of an organ and
its functions is a natural assumption of the physiologist, whose
business it primarily is to establish a norm for the pathologist
rather than explore idiosyncrasies. But brain is the organ of
personality, and enough has been said in connexion with the
individuality of the alpha rhythms and the variable experiences
of the subject in the flicker test, to indicate that at some point
we should have to begin to examine phenomena of the living
brain as elements or at least intimations of personality.
   The more we learn about the brain, the more clearly we see
                                                              171


===== PDF PAGE 172 =====

The Living Brain
that it can only be studied profitably as a complex of mechan­
isms; and to study all the mechanisms of the brain implies
reference to all its functions, including phenomena which are
the physical counterparts of mental events. Thus if the brain
physiologist today passes across an old scientific frontier, it is
not to join - though still serving - the practitioners, but as an
entirely fresh approach to the study of the everyday working of
the human mind in so far as it is capable of quantitative obser­
vation. To some psychologists this appears to be undermining
their position; by others it is welcomed as possibly providing
some elements of a more secure material basis for a science
that has neither units nor axioms.
    Still more consequential in time may be the arrival of the
brain physiologist in the social field. He is already providing a
certain amount of public service, but not one thousandth part
 of the assistance he is likely to be called upon to give when
 ‘prevention is better than cure’ becomes the watchword in
 mental as well as physical health policy.
    It was in fact in connexion with clinical service that the first
 information of specific importance concerning mechanistic in­
 timations of personality was discovered. This was during the
 war period in the eeo laboratory of the Burden Neurological
 Institute. It will be recalled that one of the first curiosities
 which had been noticed about the alpha rhythms by early
 electroencephalographers had been that in no two people are
 they the same. Not even identical or uniovular twins have quite
 identical alpha patterns. But in any one person the pattern is
  remarkably constant from year to year, once cerebral maturity
 has been reached at the age of fourteen or so. It was noted
  that the differences between individuals are very great. Early
  speculations did not go beyond that; the differences were re­
  garded as otherwise meaningless.
    The individuality of eeg records, brainprints, seemed to be
  similar to that of fingerprints, giving simple identification.
  This in itself was a physiological novelty. The skin is indivi­
  dualist also to the point of rejecting a graft of any other
  person’s skin, but no organ was known to furnish positive
  identification by its behaviour. And later observations in a
 172


===== PDF PAGE 173 =====

                                    Intimations of Personality
wider field showed there was more in it than that. When the
correlation between certain phases of rhythmic activity and
certain features of personality was first demonstrated, it was as
surprising as if the loops and whorls of fingerprints had ac­
quired meaning. The main facts which have since been verified
in this connexion can now conveniently be presented in
sequence of age.
   Among the first papers published by Berger was one on the
relation between age and the eeg. The observations he had
made with his too simple equipment suggested that little elec­
trical activity of any sort was present up to the age of one
month, and from this age, up to a few years old, amplitude and
frequency increased steadily. His observations were generally
and broadly confirmed. It soon became evident, however, that
some activity is present from birth, and that its increase is not
simply a function of age. It has now been found that even
before birth some electrical activity can be detected.
    If electrodes are attached to the belly of a pregnant woman
in the eighth month of gestation, whenever the head of the
child moves in the region near them, slow irregular delta waves
can be recorded. Sometimes the delta activity is interrupted by
larger and more rhythmic discharges similar to the wave-and-
spike patterns usually associated with epileptic attacks. It is
 unlikely that all the babes in whom these patterns have been
detected before birth will turn out to be epileptic; rather we
 may suppose that, while nestling in its private pool within the
 womb, the child approaching full term is outgrowing the re­
 sources of that haven. The convulsive twitching and stretching
 of the unborn child is evidence that its oxygen supply is lagging
 behind its needs; with growth the deficit increases, and with it
 the petty seizures; until, at the appointed phase of some
maternal tide, half suffocated, the baby thrashes its way to
 freedom or disaster. So, too, the pulsations of a jellyfish, aug­
 mented in the breathless oily calm of a summer sea, drive it
 toward regeneration in the foam of breakers.
    At birth, and for some months after, the main feature of the
 eeg is still irregular delta rhythms. The more passive and

 somnolent the infant, the more prominent are the delta
                                                              173


===== PDF PAGE 174 =====

The Living Brain
rhythms. Even in the first few days of life there is a marked
difference between the sleeping and waking patterns of eeg.
Changes of frequency are correlated best with brain weight,
changes of amplitude with the number of active neurones in
the first few months and with skull thickness thereafter.
   For some time it was thought that the alpha rhythms of adult
life are rarely found in children less than eight years old; later
analytical technique was more revealing, and a much greater
number and variety of childhood rhythms have been identified.
(Figure 13.) We can now say that no records of children below
the age of three are found which could be accepted as normal
by adult standards. From that age, however, the typical features
of the normal adult record appear more and more frequently,
and even below the three-four years age-group some alpha
components are found - small, diffuse, unresponsive, and
usually masked in the primary traces of the record. Rhythms
of the alpha type then begin to appear in short bursts, often at
considerable amplitude. In some children of four they are even
the dominant feature of the record, although the typically in­
fantile rhythms, both delta and theta, are still clearly visible.
   In most children the records vacillate between the theta and
alpha types for some years, at least until the age of ten or
eleven. It is noteworthy that a record with no alpha activity at
all - common enough in adults - is extremely rare in children
below the age of twelve. When the alpha rhythms first appear
in very early childhood, they are scarcely responsive even to
arresting visual stimulation; they begin to show an unmistak­
able connexion with vision only after the age of three-four
years. The effect of mental activity or non-visual stimuli cannot
be very accurately tested in infants, but the classical blocking
reaction appears clearly at the age of six-seven in some chil­
dren. Statistically adult responsiveness is not found before the
age of ten-eleven, when also some children show a very low
amplitude rhythm even with the eyes shut, and others a per­
sistent one, as in the adult population.
   Absence of alpha rhythms in adults is normally a sign of
vivid visual imagination; in babies and young children this
seems an unlikely explanation. Judged from their behaviour.
174


===== PDF PAGE 175 =====

                                                     Figure 13
      ,.. a much greater number and variety of childhood rhythms have been identified.




175
      e e g fro m a child aged tw o an d a h a lf years show ing d elta, th eta, an d alp h a co m p o n en ts.


===== PDF PAGE 176 =====

The Living Brain
children are relatively unimaginative below the age of three or
four. So the later appearance of alpha rhythms and their rela­
tive unresponsiveness may be a sign of the maturing faculty of
visual imagination and the lack of practice in its use.
   There will be more to say about delta later, essentially the
billowy rhythm of sleep; nor is it surprising to find that in their
electrical behaviour the brains of infants and adults resemble
one another only in sleep. Sleeping like a child, we say. But
also, behaving like a child. In the first case our brain is rocking
gently on the delta waves of the cradle; the other is not so
simple, though the saying is equally apposite.
   Apart from the lowest frequencies in the juvenile spectrum,
probably associated with the earliest and most vulnerable stages
of cortical development, the most arresting feature in the
analysis of children’s records is the activity at frequencies be­
tween four and seven cycles per second. These rhythms were
still regarded as merely transitional between the very slow
rhythms of the infant and the faster alpha activity of the adult,
when chance observation of the subject’s change of mood
directed our attention to the possibility of a more significant
psychological correlation. With further observation, the follow­
ing points among others were noted. Theta activity is usually
dominant in records of the two-five, years age-groups; it is
approximately equal to alpha activity at five-six years; it is
smaller above six years, and very small or intermittent at ten.
With other technical observations, a case was thus made for
regarding this group of rhythms as specific; they were named
‘theta’ because they were first identified in clinical studies as
arising in or near the thalamus, the antique bridal chamber of
the brain, considered by some as the factory of feeling, the seat
of emotional display.
   Once mechanically distinguished in this way, there was little
difficulty in enlarging upon the first indication that theta
activity was connected with the mood of the subject. No
 marked response was shown to ordinary visual stimulation, as
 with alpha activity, but it soon became clear that theta is asso­
ciated in some delicate fashion with pleasure and pain. It is
 easily evoked in a young child, for instance, by frustration, by
176


===== PDF PAGE 177 =====

                                     Intimations of Personality
snatching away a proffered sweet. But the change may be objec­
tively apparent as pleasure (cooing or smiling) as well as annoy­
ance (whimpering and kicking).
   Even in earliest days, and throughout childhood, individual
differences are striking. In some children the theta activity is
clearly associated with affective changes of any sort; in some it
is linked only with pleasant feelings; in others only with un­
pleasant ones. It is a truism that in a child below the age of
ten years or so the show of feelings is more exuberant and less
intellectual than in older people. It may well be that this charac­
teristic is associated with the late development of certain of the
cortico-thalamic connexions and the consequent relative
dominance of thalamic activity (with which the theta rhythms
are indirectly associated) over behaviour during the first years
of life. Such relationship, easier to assume than to establish,
unless a Slaughter of the Innocents is contemplated, is at least
a useful hypothesis.
   The connexion between the changing of the rhythms from
age to age and the anatomical maturing of the brain is evidently
complex. The extent and nature of these changes, we may
assume, will depend upon which of the innumerable areas and
connexions of the brain are mature; and the dependence will
not be a simple one; for the changes will be affected not only by
the development of the nervous system but also by the presence
of a complex private system of acquired responses and con­
ditioned reflexes. Young children live in a world which few of
them can describe and few adults remember; it is the special
features of this world which, as much as anything else, deter­
mine the theta patterns of the young.
   The notion of anatomical connexion with the theta rhythms
is still more suggestive when we come to consider what is
known of the phenomenon in conditions other than childhood.
For some time ‘slowing of the alpha rhythm’, or ‘deceleration
of the dominant’, had been regarded as an empirically patho­
logical sign associated with organic lesions and psychiatric
disorders. Its real significance appeared only when analytical
unmasking showed that the appearance of ‘slowing’ was due
to the presence of a separate, slower rhythm, masked by or
                                                                177


===== PDF PAGE 178 =====

The Living Brain
masking the alpha rhythms according to its relative amplitude.
   The resulting correlation of the theta rhythm with the
thalamus and structures around the third ventricle has been
elaborated by Denis Hill in connexion with aggressive psycho­
pathy. This led him in the course of further observations to
recognize the existence of a group of psychopaths with a special
characteristic unilateral slow theta discharge, which he termed
‘dysrhythmic aggressive behaviour’ cases, or dab. The type
of behaviour characteristic of this group involved violent
attacks on living creatures in the attempt, as Freud put it, to
turn living matter back into the inorganic state. These destruc­
tive and murderous episodes were often almost or completely
unmotivated by ordinary standards; they recall irresistibly the
purposeless destruction tolerated but deprecated in young chil­
dren when frustrated, or, to readers of St Augustine, his
angry baby whose ‘weakness of infant limbs, not its will, is its
innocence’.
   St Augustine would have been interested in the measure in
which eeg records confirm the connexion between the sinful
mood of infant and adult. Few of us indeed escape unscathed
from the test. We are all miserable sinners. In ordinary circum­
stances the theta rhythms are scarcely visible in good-tempered
adults, but they may be evoked even in them by a really dis­
agreeable stimulus. It is difficult to arrange this in a laboratory,
where its artificiality is as obvious to the subject as it is embar­
rassing to the experimenter. The subject must feel himself
really deeply offended by some personal affront; one’s enemies
are not likely to yield themselves so conveniently into one’s
hands; of strangers one cannot know enough to be sufficiently
offensive; and a friend one may not, by definition, offend.
   For some years research itself was frustrated by this situa­
tion; our hypothesis predicted that theta rhythm should be
evoked by su:table emotional stress in any normal adult person,
but we could not bring ourselves to jeopardize impersonal
relations with experimental subjects. We then had the notion
of testing the effects of pleasant instead of unpleasant stimuli.
In one of the earliest experiments, records were taken and
analysed from a French student while his head was being
178


===== PDF PAGE 179 =====

                                     Intimations of Personality
stroked by a young lady from Wales. The stroking had no de­
tectable effect upon the analysis, but we noticed that whenever
the stroking was interrupted, a few seconds later the analyser
indicated a sudden transient outburst of theta rhythms at six
cycles per second. This suggested that the withdrawal of a
mildly pleasant sensation was more upsetting than the adminis­
tration of mildly unpleasant ones such as we had tried with this
subject Animal psychologists also have noticed the startling
effects of mild pleasure ending. Hebb describes how a chim­
panzee may be quite content to stare quietly for hours at an
attractive female some cages away, then break down in a
paroxysm of rage and exasperation when she retires to her
sleeping-chamber.
   Short of strip-tease, we proceeded to tantalize a number of
normal and clinical subjects by various innocuous devices.
The responses varied with the subjects; but we discovered in
many of them a remarkable property of theta activity - an
extreme constancy of distribution and development of it in
certain subjects throughout a whole series of experimental
frustrations. In individuals of this constant sensitivity, whenever
a pleasant situation comes to an end, a theta rhythm begins to
appear regularly a few seconds later and culminates in about
ten seconds, when it abruptly disappears. This crescendo, with
its sudden finale, is so stereotyped that half a dozen such
records, taken in a series of individual tests, can be super­
imposed on one another and even the details of the rhythmic
 discharge can be seen to coincide time after time. (See Figure 14.)
    Why, in contrast to all other functions of the normal brain,
 should this particular response to cessation or lack of pleasure
 be so invariable? This still perplexes; it can only be conjectured
 that perhaps adjustment to frustration and disappointment is
 one of the first and firmest foundations of personality. Just as,
 in learning, many possible ideas must be jettisoned in the search
 for significance, so there may be more unpleasant ideas than
 pleasant ones, and most pleasures are indeed but fleeting.
    In an earlier chapter some evidence that the alpha rhythms
 provide a scanning mechanism for visual signals was con­
 sidered. If the alpha rhythms scan for pattern, we may perhaps
                                                                179


===== PDF PAGE 180 =====

                             o(/>
                            43o

                 O      c* £


                §> §5
                c «j as
                =
                4J
                   ~ *•*
                   3 0)
                ^JP*o
                <— o.-,
                   U w <•-•
                •0*r»
                 0> -O
                       wo
                 r- 3*^: o
           CN^ r
           *
               O w O o
                 "* GS
               CLOT5
            k HE gS
          •5
           ^4«»g.§: o-S ©
               .r _ o> o
           Q 43.S«r-s
                     GO 1>
          •5     00.?
           *• c 3^     £ -O
          -s:JJ'CE
                 a-t= §Zs
          ^ _ 00 C/5
           O .£>oiqw43 O
           i^'5'w3<U-w
      ;rW) S!5 —sc 60a^ ?.v 5=»a
                 5^     c-5
                     T3 O
           - p-s:
           ^ gep
           C &«e.H
          .$     i-s!"
           s - W4-C
                 w 5*r .
           *
                 :sp
                 «•=««
               -* C _ ej
                 <-» u ^3 w
               cSS3
                c “ C8 q

                >»>\o C
               X>X.-g       c
               •0*0
                 1> o SohS*-^O
               .*.*
                 ^ t> ° G
                 EE §3
                4=4=— CO
                >»>» 1/4 W


                •£-£.S|
                « —RJ —,0> OUdj
                         o u
                Fr-'Z <


180


===== PDF PAGE 181 =====

                                     Intimations of Personality
consider the theta rhythms as scanning for pleasure. On this
basis the uniform swell of theta rhythms, as pleasure fades,
would represent the renewed search for other pleasures, while
its abrupt snuffing-out is a measure of the individual’s habit of
stoical acceptance and resignation, an admirable and hard-won
fortification against vain regret. As a corollary, the persistence
of theta rhythms in children and ill-humoured adults may be
a simple sign of inexperience in the first, of intemperance in the
second.
   In bad-tempered adults, especially in those with an unusual
tendency to aggressive behaviour, the theta rhythms are often
prominent and may sweep through quite a large area of the
brain. Their childish intolerance, selfishness, impatience, and
suspicion are mirrored in the juvenile appearance of their brain
patterns. Are they still children at heart? The coincidence is so
obvious that we are tempted to jump to the conclusion that the
theta rhythm of childhood is qualitatively and functionally
identical with - as it is quantitatively similar to - the theta
rhythm of adult pathology, sign of relative immaturity of the
mechanisms linking cortex, thalamus, and hypothalamus. How
convenient it would be, and socially how useful, if one could
classify the whole population morally by examining their theta
rhythms! But the case is not so simple. It seldom is. As so often
in scientific research, when a goal seems to be in sight, you find
something quite unexpected round the corner. In this case it
was, instead of theta rhythms, delta.
   With the assistance of a public authority it was possible to
examine a considerable number of intellectually normal delin­
 quent children and to relate the features of their eegs with
an assessment of personal and social backgrounds. The odds
seemed to be heavily in favour of finding pronounced theta
activity as a sign-manual of mischief. One might have expected
to be able to pick out the really ‘bad boys’ by their theta sig­
natures. Actually eighty-five per cent of the records were
‘abnormal’ or at least peculiar, but no significant correspond­
ence was found between the presence of theta rhythms and
 particularly bad behaviour records. The whole research seemed
to be otherwise negative until, after tedious statistical tests of
                                                                181


===== PDF PAGE 182 =====

The Living Brain
the association between other features of behaviour and the
results of automatic analysis of the eeg records, it was found
that the significant rhythms in seventy per cent of the children
were not theta but the slower delta activity, hitherto associated
only with pathological conditions, with infants, and, as will be
discussed in more detail later, with sleep. The only character­
istic of behaviour which was significantly correlated with the
presence of delta activity in these children was not aggressive­
ness, but a relatively promising reaction to their mothers, to
leisure, and to their fellows, as estimated by the authorities
responsible for classifying them.
   Consideration of what these estimates imply has suggested
that the common factor related statistically to delta rhythms
is a comparatively docile attitude to suggestions from others.
The terms ‘malleable’, ‘easily helped’, ‘easily led’ were used,
and the word that seems most apt and free from irrelevant or
misleading associations is ‘ductile’. The significant delta activity
in these boys was small and hard to measure, even with the best
analytical equipment; it was often masked completely in the
primary records by alpha or theta rhythms; but the suggestion
of something infantile is hard to escape. The ages ranged from
ten to seventeen and due allowance was made for the normal
differences between juvenile and adult records. There was
no correlation with age, so arrested or delayed maturity seems
an adequate explanation. The delta distribution was not the
same as in babies; it was mainly in the temporal, parietal, and
occipital lobes, but usually diffusely located; and in only a
few boys could it be compared directly with a baby’s record.
There is doubtless more to be learned from this observation
and particularly its relation to the various contingencies of
education and social rehabilitation.
    Evidence that the condition of the electrical activities - alpha,
 delta, and theta - are closely connected with the maturing of
 the personality is plentiful. We should expect therefore to find
signs of mechanistic immaturity in cases of disturbed be­
haviour. By watching the decline or development of brain
 rhythms in a child it is possible to follow to some extent the
formation and growth of character, and so be guided in or
182


===== PDF PAGE 183 =====

                                       Intimations of Personality
warned against correction or encouragement.
   The correlation between deep feelings, the wells of person­
ality, and the apparently simple electrical discharges which we
record and analyse, may seem remote to those who have never
witnessed the connexion between them either as the result of
statistical investigation or in the course of a laboratory experi­
ment. A few minutes of theta flicker would probably be con­
vincing. Visual stimulation at the frequency of the theta rhythm
evokes, even in a normal subject, a feeling of annoyance and
frustration. If you are an irascible type it may make you very
angry. The mood changes completely without any external
emotional stimulus. If, however, during visual stimulation, an
emotional stimulus is added - if the subject is told something
really disturbing or annoying to him - the effect of this double
stimulus is a summation of the two effects of flicker and
emotional stimulus when given separately. (See Figure 14.)
   Are we then at the mercy of these theta rhythms? Do they
provide an excuse for outbursts of uncontrollable bad temper in
young and old? By no means. Laboratory experiments confirm
most of the admonitions about learning to keep our temper,
which we heed when young or wish we had in later years. The
characteristic sign of those who have learned to do so can be
recognized in the laboratory. When the theta rhythm recedes,
after its first evocation by flicker, we are getting a quantitative
description of the subject’s efforts to suppress the bad feelings
that accompany it. These coded messages from his brain can
be deciphered, following the ups and downs of the conflict, as
he struggles to keep his temper or to dissipate feelings of annoy­
ance or frustration.
   There is a simple proof of the validity of this decoding: if
the flicker stimulus is given in equable emotional conditions
and the subject is encouraged to control the feeling of annoy­
ance aroused by it, the evoked electrical disturbance is
quenched - he suppresses his bad feelings, and with them their
material associates, the theta rhythms. In this experiment, easily
repeated in any laboratory equipped for flicker and analysis
recording, there can be no doubt that we are witnessing the
physical counterparts of mental events.
                                                                183


===== PDF PAGE 184 =====

The Living Brain
   Here, for once, when the coded signal is deciphered, the
message turns out to be a very personal one; also the informa­
tion it contains can be verified through other channels, by the
subject’s account of his experience. We still do not know
enough about the delta and theta rhythms to say much more
than this; but, given a wider field of observation and a more
varied correlation of the rhythms with personal characteristics,
there is promise of much information of potential social value.
Already, as indicated, some public use is being made of the
assessment of character which statistical and analytical correla­
tion of the recorded rhythms can contribute to the general
picture; and the forensic use of eeg is now orthodox in
criminal procedure.
   Discussion here has been limited to aspects of the rhythms
dominant in childhood about which interpretation could be
offered with some degree of confidence. There are plenty of
hints of other significant correlations to be discovered by
patient work in this field, not only in the characteristic rhythms
of the child but in the development of the adult alpha rhythms
and their relation to the maturing character of the brain. An
index of special aptitudes and ineptitudes, of temperamental
maturity, tendencies of self-indulgence and self-control, as
shown by the mechanistic responses of the brain, for which
there can be no coaching, will be possible in the near future.
It may prove to be a useful supplement to, or substitute for, the
conventional iq and personality tests.
   The alpha rhythms, as might be expected, are a source of
more general information about personality than those of
childhood. The irregularity of their first appearance has been
noted - they emerge sporadically, even below the age of three
and become dominant in rare cases at the age of four, although
typically adult responsiveness is not generally found until about
the eleventh year. The differences are so wide as to seem
random, but after our experience with first impressions of ‘the
Berger rhythm’ we must hesitate to conclude that they are
meaningless. About the brain it would be better to assume that
nothing means nothing. Some of the records of children being
made today will be interesting reading when examined in con­
184


===== PDF PAGE 185 =====

                                    Intimations of Personality
nexion with the adult achievements of those children. Mean­
while there is much to be learnt today from the variations of
mature alpha rhythms.
   Meaning began to emerge from what had seemed random
differences of personal rhythms as soon as a sufficient number
of records had been taken to show that there is a natural
grouping of differentiated responses to the normal blocking by
mental effort. It has already been mentioned as one of the
earliest observations of eeg, that in most people the alpha
rhythms, prominent when the eyes are shut and the mind is at
rest, disappear whenever the eyes are opened or when the sub­
ject makes a mental effort - for example, while doing a sum
in mental arithmetic. Exceptions had of course been noticed;
entire absence of rhythms in some cases. But it was only in
the course of war services at the Burden Neurological Institute
that we were able to designate some of these exceptions as a
stable group with definite characteristics. It was shown in 1943
that individuals with persistent alpha rhythms which are hard
to block with mental effort, tend to auditory, kinaesthetic, or
tactile perceptions rather than visual imagery. In this group of
persons the alpha rhythms continue even when the eyes are
open and the mind is active or alert.
   The group with persistent activity is known as P for short,
while the larger group, whose alpha rhythms are responsive,
are known as R. A third group was further definable as those
people in whose eeg’s no significant alpha rhythms are found,
even when taken with the eyes shut and the mind idle. This
group is known as M, for minus, and consists of persons whose
thinking processes are conducted almost entirely in terms of
visual imagery. (See Figure 15.)
   Several surveys have been made to find out how these types
are distributed in the population; groups comprising more than
600 persons have been studied for this purpose. The proportions
vary a good deal according to occupation but, in general, about
two thirds of an ordinary normal group of people selected at
random are found to be of the R type, and the remaining third
are about evenly M and P. The proportion of M types is usually
 rather higher in science students than in arts students.
                                                              185


===== PDF PAGE 186 =====

The Living Brain
  Here is a simple test by which you may be able to tell to
which group you or your friends belong:
Shut your eyes. Think of a cube like a child’s block. It is painted.
Now imagine that you cut it in halves across one side, then cut these
halves in halves, and then cut them a third time at right angles.
Now. think of the little cubes you have made. How many of their
sides will be unpainted?
   Did you work it out or did you ‘see’ it? Then what else did you
see? What colour was the cube? Did you see the sawdust falling as
you cut it?
                EYES OPEN.. SHUT




                             Figure 15
         '...a discrepancy in their ways of thinking.’
        Alpha type records: (a) R Type (b) P Type (.c) M Type
186


===== PDF PAGE 187 =====

                                    Intimations of Personality
  Note particularly the question about colour. Quite often,
when you have put the test to someone precisely as above, the
reply will be red or green or whatnot; and if you then ask,
why red or green or whatever the colour mentioned, you will
very likely be told that you had said it was that colour! If the
picture visualized had such details as this, more details than are
really necessary, the subject may be one of the M type, a
visualist with few if any alpha rhythms; if he saw no picture
at all, he is likely to be a non-visualist with persistent alpha
activity, a P type. If he had a picture that was just clear enough
for the purpose but no more, he is probably a mixed type,
mostly R, with a responsive alpha rhythm.
   When a solution or decision of any kind can be reached by
visualizing it, the performance of the M type of people is rapid
and precise; but when they are faced with a problem of an
abstract kind, or one in which the mental pictures required are
too elaborate for them, they become sluggish and confused. On
the other hand, at the other extreme, the smaller P group,
people whose alpha rhythms persist even with the eyes open
and doing a sum, do not use visual images in their thinking
unless they are obliged to do so. Even then, their mind’s eye is
almost blind; they think in abstract terms, or in sounds, or
movements; they may even have to ‘feel’ their way out of an
imaginary maze. The R group, the responsives, whose alpha
rhythms disappear when they do a sum or open their eyes, are
intermediate between the other two groups; while they do not
habitually use private pictures for their everyday thinking,
they can evoke satisfactory visual patterns when necessary.
Moreover, they can combine data from the various sense
organs more readily than can either the M or P types. So even
if you did the cube test just now by visualization, it is possible
you belong to the more adaptable and versatile R group. The
test of the cubes is valid as far as it goes, but only a recording
and analysis of your eeg could give you your standing in your
class.
   There is still a great deal to be learnt about these groups.
 For instance, the origin of the differences between them. When
and how does the differentiation become so clearly defined?
                                                               187


===== PDF PAGE 188 =====

The Living Brain
Why are the alpha rhythms so persistent when they first appear
in childhood? We must be cautious about jumping to any such
conclusion as that children only learn later to think in visual
terms, although this is suggested by the extreme rarity of M
type children. If, as seems likely, imaginative thinking becomes
habitual at about the age when alpha rhythms appear, the
startling differences between children, and the critical in­
fluence of age on the effects of deprivation, may find an
explanation in the tardy and variable development of these
physiological mechanisms, which in the adult provide the con­
solation in exile so conspicuously lacking in the very young.
We have not yet had time to follow the development of a large
enough population from birth to maturity to discover how
soon and how permanently these differences are established.
   Evidence already available, however, both statistical and ex­
perimental, strongly suggests that the alpha rhythm characters
are inborn and probably hereditary. We are also beginning to
get some notion of the distribution of rhythm characteristics
in the population. Alpha rhythms vary in frequency, as we have
seen, from eight to thirteen cycles per second. The distribution
of these frequencies in the population seems to be as normal
as the variations of stature; so that, like stature, it may well
depend on many factors, some hereditary and some environ­
mental. But the way the alpha rhythms respond to mental
effort, and the consequent grouping which has been described,
is less straightforward in its distribution. It may be more like
eye-colour or blood-group in its dependence on heredity - com­
plicated, however, by the effects of individual experience and
impressions.
   Differentiation by experience can be most clearly traced in
the case of identical twins. The resemblance between the alpha
rhythms of uniovular twins is as close as that of their finger­
prints; the resemblance of the unstimulated rhythms persists
through the years. Differences soon begin to appear, however,
in the details of their responses to stimulation. The similarity
of their brain mechanisms may continue to be as close as their
physical resemblance when they mature, but their conditioning
experience will not have been precisely alike. The differences
188


===== PDF PAGE 189 =====

                                    Intimations of Personality
of these imposed patterns show not in the records of their rest­
ing rhythms but in those of their responses to stimulation. They
may seem identical to casual acquaintances, as much alike as
ever in form and feature; but the experimental responses of
their eegs will indicate slight differences of character which
possibly only their intimates will have noticed. When we find
such evidence in our records, we seem to be justified in saying
that we not only detect but are also able to measure acquired
differences of personality.
   An appreciation of theta activity has various applications and
possible uses. In what way could this information about alpha
rhythms be of service? There is no doubt that the different
characters of the three personality groups - P, R, M - and the
effects of their different ways of thinking, are constantly in­
truding in our daily life. Everyone is familiar with the un­
accountable nature of (other people’s) family squabbles and
perhaps even our own lovers’ quarrels. Apart from arithmetical
problems, in which nobody is much concerned about how they
are done as long as the answer is correct, the three different
ways of dealing with any question may, and often do, lead us
far apart before we reach a common destination. Here is a
simple example.
   Supposing Peggy and Michael at breakfast receive an invita­
tion to a party and have to decide whether they shall go to it;
and supposing Peggy is an extreme P type and Michael an
extreme M type. Michael will have a whole series of vivid
pictures about it all in his mind; he will see them going to the
party, the party itself, the people they will meet, and so forth;
and he will compare it all with alternative pictures of what they
will be doing if they do not go, perhaps a vision of somebody
awkwardly asking him the day after it why they weren’t there.
That is the way M types literally figure things out for them­
selves. He will come to his decision that way very quickly, and
 in discussing the pros and cons with Peggy he will try to make
 her figure it out that way, too. But Peggy, being a P type who
 does not use visual images in this quick and easy way, has a
 more abstract method of thought, and will be considering the
 advantages and disadvantages of going, balancing duty and
                                                              189


===== PDF PAGE 190 =====

The Living Brain
other obligations against the pleasure of an outing, the con­
venience of going against the effort, the number of times ‘we’ve
been there without asking them here’, and so on. She will be
irritated by Michael’s efforts to make her see his pictures, while
he will be equally annoyed by her attempts to make him appre­
ciate her heartfelt abstractions. It is not that one of them is
more self-centred than the other, though if the reader happens
to be of either type he may already have decided that the other
one is. Worse than any adjustable blinkers of that kind, their
language, their mental accents, so to say, are incompatible.
Through nothing but the differences of their ways of thinking,
before they can come to agreement, things may get to such a
pitch that neither will give the other credit for clarity, consis­
tency, or good taste.
   Fortunately extreme types are rare; but when two people
display unreasonable and irreconcilable differences of approach
to a question, before concluding that this is due to innate anta­
gonism or incompatibility of purpose, a discrepancy in their
ways of thinking may be worth looking into. Communication
between them, meanwhile, might be easier through an inter­
mediary of the R type - who on occasion can use both ways of
thinking. (See Figure 16.)
   Suggestions for other applications of this knowledge about
the mechanisms of the thinking brain will occur to the reader.
One is obvious in these days of protracted international wrang­
ling. How many negotiations may be frustrated simply by the
fact that one of the negotiators is an extreme P type and the
other an extreme M type! Like Peggy and Michael they want
to agree and eventually may come to agreement, but meanwhile
the peace of the world is in jeopardy through mischance of
alpha grouping, just as a man’s life may be imperilled by a
 mistake in blood-groups. Academic examinations are designed
to discover character as well as capacity, but these basic mech­
anisms of mental behaviour, the characteristic operations of a
person’s way of thinking, are masked by all manner of social
and intellectual tricks. Competitive examination does not reveal
them; it is not a question of one type being superior to another.
Even the most extreme types are undesirable only, like matter,
190


===== PDF PAGE 191 =====

                                       Intimations of Personality
            EYES OPEN




     EYES OPEN _..CAJ.CUl,ATIN6 AVPUP.




  EYES SHUT_ _ _ _ CALCULATING ALOUD




                   READING ALOUD




                              Figure 16
             ‘Fortunately, extreme types are rare'
Record of extreme P type. So persistent were the alpha rhythms in this
subject (Peggy in the fable) that the only way to stop them was to make
                             her read aloud.
                                                                   191


===== PDF PAGE 192 =====

The Living Brain
in the wrong place, in the wrong company. It might be well to
index all politicians, and his alpha designation should certainly
be on the passport of every diplomat.
   Occasionally disorders of thought are found associated with
wildly exaggerated alpha characteristics, but mental illness is
usually accompanied only by the most subtle and evanescent
changes in the eeg. An alpha rhythm which persists when
the eyes are open and the subject is apparently fully occupied -
reading aloud for instance - is usually suggestive of some isola­
tion from reality. In a few cases absurdly persistent alpha
rhythms have been the first clear indication of something wrong,
that what seemed unintelligible or eccentric brilliance was
really lunatic delusion.
   Rhythmic activity in the alpha range of frequency at nine to
ten cycles per second is sometimes found in the front rather
than the back of the head, with the activity in the two hemi­
spheres seemingly quite dissociated. In such cases the ‘alphoid’
rhythm, as Sessions Hodge has dubbed it, is not reduced by
visual or mental activity. A significant proportion of such sub­
jects are referred for examination because they have suddenly
committed some offence in an acute confusion of lust and
frustration. In some cases, when the confused episode is over,
the alphoid rhythm disappears and a normal occipital alpha
rhythm may be found - at a different frequency from the frontal
one. These are truly miserable sinners, as compared with the
insane with persistent occipital alpha rhythms, who often seem
quite content in the private circle of their intractable fantasies.
   Generally, then, the electrical signs of brain function corre­
late better with ‘how’ than with ‘how much’. The superficial
eeg differences are linked more closely with personality than

with intelligence. There is one measure, however, which seems
to vary with extremes of dullness and brilliance. Soon after we
started making regular frequency analyses of records it was
realized that the results depended to some variable extent on
the length of time over which the analysis was made. In the
standard instrument the analysis ‘epoch’ was ten seconds; if we
added up the readings over six such epochs and divided each
of the 144 readings by six we obtained an average frequency
192


===== PDF PAGE 193 =====

                                      Intimations of Personality
spectrum of one minute. This average sometimes looked very
like the separate analyses from which it was made up; some­
times it was quite different. The greatest variance we found in
our more brilliant colleagues or friends, the least in our duller
patients. Revolting at the prospect of so much arithmetic, we
devised a computing circuit to do the job automatically; nearly
all analysers are now fitted with this ‘averager’ and various
lengths of period can be averaged. With this device it is possible
to extract a measure of what one may call the ‘versatility’ of
the brain.
   The more original types, verging towards genius, seem to
have a high versatility in this sense; to obtain a set of average re­
sults similar to one another, one has to average over a very long
time - several minutes, at least. In ‘dull’ brains half a dozen ten-
second analyses may be indistinguishable from one another.
   This may seem a difficult statistic to understand, but in fact
one uses similar judgements every day - without arithmetic.
A ‘brilliant’ driver, for example, is one who goes very fast when
speed is safe, very slowly when caution is indicated, who
accelerates briskly and slows down quickly, matching his per­
formance to the conditions of the road. The average speed of
such a driver, taken over periods of, say, one minute, would
show great variations, and only his lap times would be constant.
But a dull driver creeps round at a low steady average; his
speeds on bends and on the straight are not very different, and
they compare with his lap speed, too. So the brain seems to vary
in the span of its variance, matching in the brighter ones the
scale of its effort to the quality of the task.
   In an ageing population, attention naturally veers toward
the art of growing old. The brain is not, in general, the limiting
factor in determining the length of our days. Disorders of the
heart and circulation, the appearance of malignant growth,
accidents, and social isolation, are responsible for the greater
proportion of the ‘old age woes’. There are of course certain
brain diseases characteristic of the last few decades of the ex­
tending normal span, but these are relatively rare and specific
disorders. The eeg changes little with advancing years; apart
from truly senile states, it may have the same features at eighty
   L.U. - 7                                                      193


===== PDF PAGE 194 =====

The Living Brain
as at sixty. Gerontology, the science of old age, has so far gained
from electrophysiology only the assurance that most brains
could outlast the other organs.
   The dying brain is calm; as the blood reaching it brings less
and less oxygen, a few slow waves appear with failing aware­
ness; these rise in amplitude, then slowly wane, and with them
fades the organization of personality. Strangely, the brain and
its subordinate ganglia are ill-armed against oxygen lack. A
man dying of coal-gas poisoning or exposure to a rarefied
atmosphere rarely feels acute distress; when the oxygen in his
blood is about half normal, he faints quietly and his brain may
show a few minor electrical disturbances, but often none. Yet,
if recovery occurs, the period of oxygen lack may leave traces
for many days or for life.
   This is the Achilles heel of the brain. Its need of oxygen and
sugar is perpetual and exacting. Lack of sugar it can signal, but
not lack of oxygen. The agony of suffocation, the gasping and
craze for air, is in fact due to the accumulation of carbon di­
oxide in the blood from the burning of the body fuel; and this
the brain does feel, choked as it were by its own smoke, even
though it cannot detect when the dampers are closing down.
   No one has yet succeeded in relating the electrical features
of the living brain with the now classical but still disputed cate­
gories of mental disorder - schizophrenia, manic-depressive
psychosis - or with the symptom groups: paranoia, delusion,
hallucination, obsession, compulsion, depression, agitation, and
the like. This has been a sad disappointment, but we may be
comforted to recall the unexpected complexity of the analysis
of the simplest form of learning. The electrical signs of mental
disturbance could well be a minor aberration in one or other of
the operations leading to the formation of ideas. We should
not detect such differences in a passive patient. Studies of the
brain responses to various types of stimulation in cases of
mental disorder are now in progress in many laboratories, and
first results suggest that such experiments will clarify much of
the inherent weaknesses and self-restoring powers of individual
brains. The difficulty is that the more refined the method of
study, the more striking is the individuality of each subject and
194


===== PDF PAGE 195 =====

                                     Intimations of Personality
of each instant in the subject's life. We are still lost in admira­
tion of the cerebral universe and have scarcely begun to name
the constellations and trace the course of individual planets in
the electrical firmament.
   Willingness to ascribe mental differences and disorders to
brain characters and diseases varies from generation to genera­
tion. There are physicians now living who remember the time
when general paralysis of the insane was the commonest form
of serious mental disorder, and was ascribed to the effects of
excessive travelling, since it was most common in sailors, sales­
men, and locomotive drivers. When it was shown to be due to
the spirochaete of syphilis, prevention and cure became a matter
of pharmacology and common sense. At the present time, many
disorders that seem essentially mental are being attacked by
physical means; there is less prejudice against this today than
there has been for several hundred years.
   Physical interference with personality by operating on the
brain has been accepted with quite extraordinary public equani­
mity. Psychosurgery has developed through bold and reason­
ably safe operations by which parts of the brain are removed,
destroyed, or isolated, in patients with only mental symptoms.
Egaz Moniz of Lisbon, who first demonstrated the prac­
tical value of such operations, received a Nobel Prize; his
 prefrontal leucotomy, the cutting of the nerve fibres that con­
 nect the front of the brain with the rest, has been performed
 on thousands of persons. Very few deaths have been reported,
 and some astonishing ‘cures’ have been achieved, even in
 patients who had been mad as hatters for years. The most
 promising results appear to be more or less enduring changes
 of personality. People with silly fixed ideas which stop them
 doing anything useful, sometimes say after the operation that
 they still have their obsessions or delusions but do not worry
 about them any more. Even when the main trouble is intoler­
 able pain - due to whatever cause - leucotomy seems to help
 the patient not to care so much, though the physical cause of
 the pain is still there. Many leucotomized people have returned
 to a full and happy life and indeed are often particularly agree­
 able and easy to get on with. An American surgeon has said
                                                               195


===== PDF PAGE 196 =====

The Living Brain
that the nicest people in his hospital are the ones with the little
scars where the horns used to grow.
   This is not a refined manner of treating the brain. The opera­
tion is sometimes effected through the eye-socket and needs no
special tools; it could have been done by a neolithic savage
equipped with nothing more than his flint scraper and the con­
viction that mental diseases can be attacked by physical
methods. Some ancient skulls do in fact show trephine holes
where there is no evidence of organic disease. In the present
trend of thought, until the contrary is proved, it will be assumed
that mental processes have physical representation in the brain
in some form, and when the mind is disturbed surgical methods
will be used where others fail.
   Operations such as leucotomy, however, are mainly of symp­
tomatic benefit to the individual; their long-term biological
effects on society are hard to assess. It must be remembered
that if the symptoms only are relieved, in a disease which is
not understood and which may have hereditary factors, the
effect may be ultimately to increase the prevalence of the
disease. For thousands of years the insane and eccentric have
been discouraged from breeding by Church and State; so
neither the disapproval of the operation expressed by the
Vatican, nor the decree of the Kremlin forbidding it, is surpris­
ing. Without considering what part heredity plays in mental
disorder, leucotomized mental patients are put back into circu­
lation and, as noted, they can be very pleasant and easy-going.
Thus, courageous and inspired surgical invention can raise
quite serious problems of the relation between individual wel­
fare and the future of the species.
   The effect of leucotomy on the electrical rhythms of the brain
is variable and correlates little with the clinical results. Usually
there is some increase in alpha activity after the operation, and
delta activity may be prominent immediately after it but dis­
appears within a matter of months. What have been described
as the personal characteristics in the behaviour of alpha and
theta rhythms are not greatly altered by leucotomy; or by
electric-shock therapy.
   In other respects electric-shock therapy, introduced from
196


===== PDF PAGE 197 =====

                                       Intimations of Personality
 Italy into this country before the war at the Burden Neurologi­
 cal Institute, also alters the personality to the extent of allaying
some of the most trying symptoms of mental disorders and
 psychological distress. It has quite surprisingly won public con­
fidence - one might almost say popularity. But again, though
a less drastic procedure than leucotomy, it must be confessed
that very little is yet known about its influence on the life his­
tory of a brain, beyond what has been empirically demonstrated
and clinically observed. When first introduced it was hoped
 that it would throw some light on epilepsy, with which its con­
vulsive effect is related, but beyond the confirmation of certain
therapeutic aspects of epilepsy, mentioned elsewhere, it has not
yet brought any major revelation such as those obtained by
non-clinical techniques. It is essential, however, that research
should continue to follow this and other experiences in psycho­
surgery.
    An axiom demonstrated by the heroic physical treatment of
mental disorder is one that has been emphasized in an earlier
chapter: only a few brain functions are permanently located in
one part of the living structure. A person who has suffered an
extensive brain injury, or submitted to prefrontal leucotomy,
usually displays some changes in personality; but re-education
and discipline can often re-establish a great part of the missing
pattern. In the early days of psychosurgery the patients were
frequently left to recover without psychiatric or psychological
assistance; it is now realized that the good effects of physical
intervention can be greatly amplified, and the bad effects
diminished, by carefully planned and rigorously maintained
personal and social re-education. Even a mutilated brain retains
its plasticity and resilience; it can still learn, still adapt to en­
vironmental stress. This principle applies in a less welcome
fashion to the tendency to relapse after physical treatment. A
patient with a characteristic personal symptom complex may
obtain great relief from a leucotomy operation, may worry less,
return to work, fit in better with the social pattern; then, per­
haps, ten years later, the symptoms may return in precisely
their original form. We know that in the brain there is no pos­
sibility of physical healing - a nerve cell is never replaced. A
                                                                 197


===== PDF PAGE 198 =====

The Living Brain
brain can no more grow a new frontal lobe or re-establish a
severed pathway than the trunk can replace an amputated limb.
Recovery of normal function and reversion to pathological dis­
order are both examples of the principles of tireless search, of
parsimony, and of plasticity, discussed earlier in connexion with
some simple models.
   One aspect of widespread submission to psychosurgery the
research worker must welcome unreservedly. The present abun­
dance of subjects with carefully planned, restricted, and reason­
ably uniform brain injuries, presents a valuable opportunity to
study the re-establishment of functional patterns; otherwise the
casualties of road and battle were his only material.
   The cerebral circumvention of crippling obstacles, the re­
sumption of even pathological behaviour patterns, is a pheno­
menon of such a personal nature that it should be common
ground for students of mind and brain alike. To the latter it
already suggests that when the physiological count of the con­
tent and structure of personality differences is made, it will be
as detailed and important as the description given of them when
psychic factors were deemed sufficient to define psychiatric
states. Pure and applied psychopathology already has an enor­
mous literature and a powerful tradition; but the material evi­
dence from this field, from the physiological standpoint, is hard
to assess, so serious is the conflict of testimony. As yet there is
very little common experience on this common ground.
   In the realm of normal psychology, the difficulty is just as
great, where so many currents are turbid with sectarian strife.
Several schools of psychology have set up various schemes of
types with which correlation can be sought; some are based on
physique, some on results of personal inquiry, some on ten­
dencies to pathological extremes; and the typology devised by
the Pavlovians has been outlined here. It would be gratifying if
eeg studies could be made to relate to any of these classifica­

tions; but so far no precise or even suggestive correspondence
has been established with any of them.
   For the time being, then, we must be satisfied to summarize
the material intimations of personality found in the electrical
activities of the living brain, without academic psychological
198


===== PDF PAGE 199 =====

                                      Intimations of Personality
correlation. They have at least the merit of being not opinions
or elements of a theory but facts recorded in experiments which
can be repeated. Brainprints, the records of the electrical
rhythms, beyond giving personal identification such as that of
fingerprints, can be obtained even before the birth of a child,
and from then onward they display in various frequencies and
amplitudes the maturing characteristics of mental development.
This is associated, though not in a simple manner, with the
maturing anatomy of the brain. The diversity is so great as to
seem random; but refined automatic analysis of the main
rhythms reveals in all of them certain features which can be
correlated with the mental experiences of the subjects, provid­
ing the data for a very diversified classification of types of all
ages. Childish behaviour in adults was shown to be related with
characteristic rhythms of childhood, and self-control demon­
strably measurable. What appears to be a scanning for pleasure
was found dominant in childhood until, as the brain matures,
the adult scanning of the alpha rhythms takes its place. Study
of the alpha rhythms themselves revealed the personal charac­
teristics of three different, and sometimes incompatible, ways of
thinking. There was a hint that, in connexion with the unex­
pected complexity discovered in the simplest form of learning,
certain signs of mental disturbance could be related to minor
aberrations in one or other of the seven operations. Study of the
alterations of personality effected by the physical treatment of
mental disorders confirmed some of the principles of organic
construction exemplified in working models. The popularity of
psychosurgery suggested some cautionary reflections while pro­
viding the brain physiologist with an invaluable field of re­
search.
   Finally, it must be recalled that these are only the first fruits
of this sapling. As recently as 1946 an eminent physiologist
could write: ‘It remains sadly true that most of our present
understanding of mind would remain as valid and useful if, for
all we knew, the cranium were stuffed with cotton wadding.’
Ten years ago, in fact, there was no precise knowledge about
any of the matters discussed in this chapter.


===== PDF PAGE 200 =====

      9
Beyond the Waking Scene
      We sleep, but the loom of life never
      stops and the pattern which was
      weaving when the sun went down is
      weaving when it comes up tomorrow.
             Henry Ward Beecher (1813-87)




The picture of the living brain outlined in earlier chapters was
one of incessant, often fruitless, activity. Even when physio­
logical or mental performance seems at the lowest ebb, elec­
trical rhythms and surges are sweeping through the brain fabric
in a shimmering procession; and, even in the pursuit of mean­
ing, the greater proportion of the brain’s wagers, its prospect­
ing, must be vain. Yet, nevertheless, there is no respite for the
electro-chemical generators, whose only relaxation is to pass
from individual preoccupation to group callisthenics.
   When we close our eyes our alpha rhythms strengthen and
join up into long trains of sinuous pattern; this may rest our
eyes, but as we draw the blinds the lights within seem to be
turned up to greater brilliance.
   In fact the increase in alpha activity during rest does not, we
suggested, imply a fundamental paradox, but rather is a sign
of unsuccessful search for pattern. The brain is unique in being
constantly speculative and expectant, and consequently often
frustrated and disappointed. We can use such terms legitimately
because we recognize, in simple laboratory experiments or in
crude working models, conditions to which they apply in all
their senses. Some other organs can relax in hours of ease. The
body muscles maintain only a skeleton staff on shift work
when the limbs have no job to do; a few fibres contract from
time to time so that some tone is preserved. The heart muscles,
on the other hand, have a full-time occupation, but their lack
200


===== PDF PAGE 201 =====

                                    Beyond the Waking Scene
of leisure is compensated by the relative simplicity of their
function; only in moments of stress is the rhythm of their
activity modified.
   The perpetual vigilance and adaptability of the brain de­
pends, as we have seen, upon its emancipation from menial
tasks, upon delegation of the bodily chores of homeostasis to
primitive centres, the original and subordinate peasantry, as it
were, of the central nervous population. Viewed impersonally
from outside, we might have expected that such a system, being
insulated from all but major emergencies, would be both stable
and indefatigable. And considering the intricacy of its func­
tional organization, the stability of the brain is remarkable. But
tireless it certainly is not.
   Perhaps the most obvious sign that there are degrees of vigi­
lance in cerebral attention is the power to close the eyes. Even
the frequency of blinking has its significance; in some neurotics
and in certain types of insanity the rate may be ten times
higher than in normal people - not to be confused with the
repeated blinking of some people when they are deep in
thought.
   Only the visual system can be cut off in this way from sensa­
tion. Experiment has shown that lowering the eyelids is more
than the mere closing of a shutter. As the lids fall, the eyeballs
roll upward, so that the cornea is wiped and protected; at the
same time, certain limiting or protective mechanisms within
the brain are suspended for an instant. This can be seen most
clearly by application of the flicker technique. In many subjects
in whom the response to flicker with eyes open or closed is
normal and restrained, if the flickering stimulus is applied just
at the moment when the eyes close, a grotesque rhythmic dis­
charge appears in almost all brain areas, with an appearance
and accompanying sensations very like a brief minor epileptic
attack. For this shock effect to be seen it is necessary for the
subject to want to close his eyes in the light and to succeed in
doing so. It does not happen if, instead of closing the eyes, the
room light is turned off as the flicker is turned on; nor if the
eyelids are closed forcibly; nor if the eyes are closed in the
dark; nor if the subject wants to close his eyes but is prevented
                                                               201


===== PDF PAGE 202 =====

The Living Brain
from doing so. It seems that, with the decision to close the eyes,
goes a relaxation of some safeguard against over-activity.
   In other people, including many who are liable to give ex­
aggerated responses to flicker, small, irregular, sharp waves ap­
pear from the back of the brain while the eyes are open and
gazing without extreme attention at a patterned scene. These
waves disappear when the gaze is fixed on a point and when the
eyes are shut. Christopher Evans, who first drew attention to
them, has called them Lambda waves. Rather similar effects
are seen when a spontaneous discharge which is being held in
check by an inhibitory process is partly released by a drop in
intensity of the inhibitory influence, or when rhythmic stimu­
lation is used to invert the action of an inhibitory mechanism.
In this latter case the stimuli are inhibitory, but at the end of
each of them an excitatory rebound occurs and a paradoxical
excitation is seen, as though the system were responding to
each stimulus, whereas actually it is responding to the end of
each stimulus.
   Closing the eyes, then, involves some sort of momentary dis-
inhibition, which promotes abnormally wide dissemination of
any signal that may happen to enter the visual pathways at that
moment. It is as though the sentries were dismissed just as the
drawbridge is raised; if they leave their post a little before the
bridge comes up, then, just for that moment, an assailant can
penetrate an otherwise impregnable keep.
   The repose we get by shutting our eyes is not, of course,
enough to refresh more than a small part of the brain; in doing
so, many people - the M-alpha types - merely pass from a
public to a private picture show. But closing the eyes is an
essential preliminary to going to sleep, a process which can be
followed quite easily with the eeg. (See Figure 17.)
   When a subject begins to feel drowsy, the first sign is usually
a reduction in alpha rhythms and their gradual replacement by
something more like the theta activity, mainly at the back and
sides of the brain but spreading occasionally to all regions. At
this stage the subject is easily roused and not yet really dozing;
it is the beginning of that delicious state when consciousness
is consciously waning. If the subject is trying not to shut the
202


===== PDF PAGE 203 =====

                                      Beyond the Waking Scene
eyes, he will find himself seeing double; if reading, he will go
over a paragraph time and again without getting its meaning.
Some have called this state ‘floating’, a metaphor that well de­
scribes the freedom from bodily care which it promotes. This is
the clue to understanding the nature of this stage of torpor; it
is as though the whole body were being shut out from mental
view, as the outside world is shut out by closing the eyes. Here
of course there is no mechanical or anatomical shutter for the
muscles and joints that can deceive the brain into neglect of its
supervisory commission; there is, however, an elaborate mech­
anism in the base and stem of the brain that, when fatigue or
custom dictates, inexorably weakens the significance of the in­
coming flood of sense data. This is the moment when the ex­
hausted driver begins to persuade himself that the road is so
straight that he can safely drive a while with his eyes shut - a
comforting thought though it be his last.
   At this stage the brain can still respond electrically and func­
tionally to incoming signals, but the electrical response begins
to show a prominent slow component, and the spread of the
faster excitatory effects is more limited and more transient.
This is the objective sign of what we called above a weakening
of the significance of the signals. It is not the direct transmission
of the nerve impulses to the projection areas that is inhibited,
but rather their dissemination - the first two operations of
learning - that is attenuated. The reader’s eyes can follow the
lines of print but the meaning of the words escapes him and,
merging into private fancy, his bedtime story becomes a dream.
   The electrical changes in this first stage of drowsiness are
clear enough to be exploited as a selective warning device for
 those who are liable to doze in dangerous situations. The re­
 semblance of the rhythms to the theta rhythms of anger and
 frustration means that such a device would also flash a light,
 or ring a bell, or nudge the subject, when he was losing his
 temper. Worn by hard-driving motorists, theta warning-sets
 would probably save more lives than do motor horns; and they
 might assist self-knowledge and self-control.
   If we follow a drowsy subject farther along the path to
 oblivion, we soon see other changes; slow irregular waves ap-
                                                                 203


===== PDF PAGE 204 =====

The Living Brain




 q    LOUD CLAP




              K-COMPLEX




                   ■\yw-^v/v^—|—




                                   ,Vw^AvW^M—^

204
     .tvVaVywY^^Af w f*vv


===== PDF PAGE 205 =====

                                         Beyond the Waking Scene
pear, and with them, from time to time, bursts of smaller, faster,
spindly waves with a frequency of about fourteen c/s. The sub­
ject is now asleep and if we waken him suddenly will start and
look confused; he may deny that he was sleeping, or he may say
that he has just had a dream.
   There is some evidence that the fourteen c/s spindle rhythms
are associated with dreams, but this is hard to prove. Most
dreams are very short, compared with the time that seems to
elapse during them. Very often outside stimuli are woven into
dreams in such a fashion as to diminish the urgency or import­
ance of the stimulus. Such dreams help to maintain sleep. Ex­
periments with controlled stimuli show that a sleeper may turn
a powerful sound stimulus lasting, say, ten seconds into a con­
tinuous feature of an elaborate dream-sequence which seems to
last for days. The sense of touch is not always so amenable.
Prompted by some momentary sexual stimulus, the sleeping
brain, master of fiction, will weave a romance around a heroine
of its own invention, a post-bedtime story that sometimes ends
in provoking the stimulus it stilled.
   As slumber deepens, its characteristic patterns become more
pronounced and the effect of stimuli assumes a new appearance
in the eeg. While the slow delta waves dominate the undis­
turbed pattern, any loud sound or firm touch evokes a complex
electrical discharge from all areas of the brain. This discharge
was called the ‘K-complex’ by Loomis and his colleagues. It re­
sembles considerably the pattern found in certain types of
epileptic patient during waking, but in these latter it is then


                               Figure 17
        . . These rhythms are the wardens of brain function.’
Three stages of sleep recorded:
(a) Light sleep - ‘floating’. Half-waking dreams may be associated with the
     disturbances shown in the record.
(f>) Medium sleep. The subject was not roused by the loud clap which
     evoked a response possibly associated with a protective dream. Later
     a ‘spindle’ followed by a similar complex may have been associated
     with a spontaneous dream. Calling his name immediately roused him.
(c) Deep sleep. When the slow waves, best seen in top and bottom lines,
     are present, the subject is hard to rouse.
                                                                       205


===== PDF PAGE 206 =====

The Living Brain
often associated with a brief convulsive spasm of the limbs. In
the sleeping normal subject the appearance of a K-complex is a
sign that the sleep is deep and hard to disturb, and it seems to
act so as to muffle the arousal stimulus. (See Figure 17.)
   The most prominent feature of K-complexes is the train of
large slow waves which reach every region. If such a figure
occurred in the waking state we should regard it as a sign of
profound pathology. But in sleep they have a beneficial role.
Like the dream that explains away the unwelcome alarm bell,
K-complexes seem to flatten the significance of intrusive signals,
so that the sleeper’s standard of meaning is stretched beyond
the tolerance of waking life. An exclamation that would evoke
an immediate response in a waking subject must be repeated a
dozen times at irregular intervals to arouse a sleeper, and at
each repetition will appear the faithful watchdog at the Gate of
Horn, admitting to consciousness only those dreams that stem
from hard reality.
   Sleep, in a restive hostile world, is a hard stake to win; in
jungle or tenement there are many voices that cry out against it,
and of these all but one or two are vain. Only the infant’s wail
for the mother, the call to work for the breadwinner, the tap­
ping on the window, or the lover’s murmured plea, faint though
they be, retain their insistent meaning. The rest - the chatter of
the tribe, the creak of rigging, the drumming of wheels on
rails - are lullabies, not signals.
   Rhythmic stimuli, we know from our cradle, are sleep-
makers; and where pattern lulls, its interruption rouses. Who,
on a long night journey in a sleeping-car, has not found himself
awake to silence or the gentle hiss of steam in some wayside
halt, and wondered that the racket of the train in ceasing had
aroused him? This too we can see in the wave patterns of the
sleeping brain; a steady sound or rocking movement leaves no
trace on the constant delta waves; but when it ends, at first a
K-complex appears, and if the steady sound starts up again the
pattern reverts to that of slumber. But a longer interval evokes
no further K-complexes; instead, within a few seconds, the pat­
tern shifts up through the stages we have described, and
abruptly the sleeper wakes.
206


===== PDF PAGE 207 =====

                                     Beyond the Waking Scene
   As in all behaviour of the waking brain, the hues of person­
ality gleam through these shadows. The length of each stage of
sleep and the pattern of awakening, the form and extent, the
abundance and efficacy of K-complexes, the frequency of
the spindle-waves of dozing - all these features are assembled
in the nocturnal rhythms with as personal a character as the
waking ones. There is some evidence that the ‘type’ of waking
record is associated with the type of sleeping pattern, but the
statistical significance of these observations is not certain.
There is still a great deal to learn about the physiology of sleep'
and its relation to brain functions as a whole. The patient
studies of the Gibbses in America have already cleared up
many outstanding difficulties. The experiments are tedious and
time-consuming beyond the average, even for this sort of work.
Even to write about sleep induces it!
   There is no clear explicit reason why the brain should need
to spend a third of its life in repose. Is it for the sake of some
other organs that the master centre closes down its receiving
and transmitting channels? Is there some subtle chemical by­
product of the brain’s fierce sugar-furnace that accumulates in
toxic quantities during sixteen hours of waking work? Or is our
precious sleep but the genetic trace of the futility of nocturnal
adventure in a wilderness of wide-eyed cats and jackals, an
heirloom fjom remote forbears who were perhaps better
equipped for the fashioning of well-hidden nests than for the
duel in the dark?
   Perhaps this apparently redundant rhythm arose even further
back in evolutionary history, when the first vertebrates emerged
from the incubator sea and felt, for the first time, the chill of
evening. Such creatures, equipped with elaborate nervous
systems, air-breathing lungs, and five-fingered limbs, could
escape the material tyranny of the ocean only to find them­
selves at the mercy of the seasons. The temperature of the sea
varies but little, scarcely appreciably from day to night, and
only by a few degrees from summer to winter. Sea creatures
can sustain an even life though the temperature of their bodies
follows the warming and cooling of their liquid home. But on
land the conditions are too extreme to maintain the tranquillity
                                                              207


===== PDF PAGE 208 =====

The Living Brain
which a nervous system must have. If the temperature falls by
twenty Fahrenheit degrees, nerve impulses will travel at half
speed, and the fine pattern of nervous function will lose its
texture. In the first chapter we allowed ourselves to conjecture
on the way of life of these early explorers between the tide-
marks and on the shore. Reptile or amphibian, as they estab­
lished their dominion over dry land in the many million years
of summer which was the carboniferous age, they must have
suffered at noonday a delirium of over-action, and as night
fell a sluggish torpor. Fortunate and fertile were those beasts
who submitted with grace and discretion to the inevitable
rhythm, curling away quietly in a private cranny as the im­
pulses lagged in their cooling nerves.
    In the private sea of our bloodstream we carry a chemical
miniature of the primeval sea. So perhaps in our brain we
inherit the need to retire from active strife as darkness falls,
even though with our hard-won homeostasis and technical in­
genuity, our fur coats, and our electric blankets, we can main­
tain our body temperature within a fraction of a degree. Even
now, as many a brave man has testified in the burning cold of
the poles or mountain peaks, when all these defences fall and
with them the body temperature, it is not a struggle or a con­
vulsion that leads to death, but a peaceful sleep. Carrying the
conjecture a step further, we discover in the slowing of the
brain rhythms a trace of that nervous deceleration that lulled
our predecessors.
    In most complex machines, when some part is fatigued or
ill-adjusted, it is better that the whole mechanism should stop
than that its function should continue with the possibility of
disaster. An engineer describes an arrangement that ensures
an orderly shut-down when a part gives way as ‘failure to
safety’. In some dangerous machines such mechanisms are
given the more dramatic name of ‘dead man’s handle’, mean­
ing that, should the driver lose control, the vehicle or turret
will come to a standstill rather than career away without a
guide. In a mechanism so intricate and so delicately poised as
the living brain we should expect to find, if not a dead man’s
handle, at least a sleeping man’s knob; and it would not be
208


===== PDF PAGE 209 =====

                                     Beyond the Waking Scene
altogether surprising if, with our genetic history, the knob were
turned by the inherited tradition of our bodily structure.
   As long ago as 1938 I suggested that delta rhythms ‘repre­
sent a true change in the natural electrical period of the cortical
neurones, a change which is usually ominous but yet reversible
if the cause is removed. During delta activity no useful work
can be done by the neurones concerned. Sometimes the delta
waves are so large that we may suspect them of paralysing the
cortex by electrocution, as it were, and we may speculate as to
whether this may not be their special function in certain con­
ditions, just as the function of pain is sometimes to immobilize
an injured part. In order to explain the occasional great size of
the slow waves it may be necessary to invoke a series con­
nexion for the cortical cells, similar to that evolved from muscle
cells in electric fish.’
   As we have already seen, slow rhythms are found in infants,
and in adults with organic disease or injury of the brain. Slow
components are prominent, too, in epileptics between seizures
and during attacks when there are no convulsions but only loss
of consciousness. All these conditions have in common the need
for protecting the brain from the consequences of its own com­
plexity. The serious results of loss of control and protection
are seen when an epileptic has a major convulsion. Then, very
rapid electrical discharges predominate, and the whole system
is thrown into revolutionary chaos. Toward the end of the
seizure, slow waves again appear and the rapid convulsive
discharges emerge only in the troughs of the slow waves. Such
considerations have suggested a phylactic, or protective, hypo­
thesis to account for the slow electrical rhythms, according to
which these rhythms are the wardens of brain function, limit­
ing the consequences of excessive or ill-coordinated activity.
Seen in this light, the K-complexes of sleep take their place
with the slow waves of infancy, epilepsy, and other conditions
of incomplete control, as censors of the news from foreign
parts, ensuring apathy if they cannot maintain discipline.
   Facile parallels are sometimes drawn between these electrical
studies and speculations of a more philosophic trend, such as
the concepts of the psychoanalytic school. There is much to
                                                               209


===== PDF PAGE 210 =====

The Living Brain
deride, and not a little we may be uneasy about, in that doctrine,
but to give Freud his due, the founder of psychoanalysis did
first insist upon the need to apply to dreams the same principles
of causality and determination that scientists must accept in
waking affairs. A dream, he insisted, springs from causes,
whether obvious or cryptic, as real as those from which our
rational everyday thoughts arise, but modified, corrupted, per­
verted into a parable so far removed from its source that the
sleeping brain is undisturbed, incapable of recognizing in such
grotesque fables the murmur of rebel serfs on whose labours
it depends. This figure of speech was used before to suggest the
liberation of our greater brain from the body’s needs, and its
dependence on the body’s calm. The Freudian analysis named,
but never dared to identify, the hierarchy of id and ego, super­
ego and censor. A detective tracing the murderer of sleep might
list on his note-pad: id - midbrain? ego - sensory cortex?
censor - K-complex, spindles? We know that the plot is thicker
than this, but such ingenuous comparisons might help to set the
traditional trap in which, in the final denouement, the simple
heroes and crafty villains will be united in one scene and
justice will be done in one of the deeper mysteries of the
living brain.
   Nor can any simple explanation be suggested for the very
varied needs of sleep. The requirement ranges even in normal
people from an hour or two to nearly twelve. In some diseases
sleepy states are predominant symptoms; nearly always in such
cases lesions can be found in the base of the brain, where also
electrical stimulation may provoke sleep, or, by a change of
stimulus or electrode position, arousal. Such facts have sug­
gested that there may be, in these primitive regions, sleeping
and waking centres, associated with those others in the neigh­
 bourhood which maintain constancy of temperature, water
content in the body, and the like - that sleep also is a depart­
ment of homeostasis. There is a class of clinical patient in
 whom insomnia, variations of temperature, and thirst, are asso­
ciated with what is still called hysterical behaviour.
    Hysteria.now has many meanings other than its original one
 which referred to wanderings of the womb; in its modem
210


===== PDF PAGE 211 =====

                                     Beyond the Waking Scene
clinical sense it is almost as common in men as in women, and
includes many of the psychosomatic conditions in which bodily
symptoms, paralysis, blindness, pain, or seizures occur without
adequate physical cause. Such people are the main subjects of
miracle cures and faith healing; their alarming and crippling
disabilities may be relieved without great difficulty by appro­
priate treatment, whether accompanied by awesome ritual or
prayer or only by a confident manner. Many quite conventional
clinics could display, if they wished, as fine a collection of
crutches and dark glasses as any centre of miraculous relief.
   In some hysterics who exhibit signs of disturbance in the
deeper parts of the brain, study of the eeg during flicker has
revealed a remarkable liability to widespread and violent elec­
trical discharges, often accompanied by jerking of the limb* as
the rate of flashing reaches eight to ten per second. This would
seem evidence of an exaggerated credulity - gullibility, one
might almost say - of the mechanisms which determine the
significance to be attached to incoming signals. The lightness
of sleep characteristic of such people is what we should expect
if the preservation of the depth of slumber depends upon main­
tenance of a high order of scepticism, so to say, in these statis­
tical filters.
   If sleep remains a mystery, what of tiredness and boredom,
fatigue and ennui? We may be tired without being sleepy,
bored without being tired.
   Fatigue has many forms, but few of us have ever reached
the limit of our endurance. When we have done hard muscular
work, we feel that our limbs are tired, and we limp or slouch
like cripples. But the fatigue is not likely to be in the muscles
- an extra incentive will evoke an extended response. Robert
Schwab in Boston has shown that if a man has to hang from
a bar by his hands ‘as long as he can', he may drop after a
minute; if he is urged to better someone else’s record, he may
 double his time; but if he is offered ten dollars he may hang
on five times as long. From an active group of muscles the
brain receives signals reporting the effort they are making and
the extent to which this matches the effect intended in the
 action. After some while, pain is felt; the active elements file a
                                                               211


===== PDF PAGE 212 =====

The Living Brain
 routine complaint of ill usage some long while before their
 efficiency is actually threatened. To such reports, as to all
 others it receives, the brain can assign the degree of significance
 that best fits the whole situation. Persuasion renewed, danger,
 training, preoccupation, experience, hysteria, drugs - all can
 modify over a very wide range the meaning of fatigue and its
 effect upon the whole organism.
    In the eeo very little trace is left by fatigue of ordinary
 dimensions, but the weariness that follows twenty-four hours’
 work without rest does result in some change in the electrical
 patterns of response. The resting records show more readily
 the preliminary changes of floating and drowsiness, as one
 would expect; but the responses to stimulation are often quite
 dramatically changed, particularly if the subject still feels
 bound to keep awake. One subject, whose normal response to
flicker was slight and accompanied only by negligible visual
illusions, after a day and night of hard anxious toil exhibited
an enormously exaggerated flicker response extending far into
 the temporal and frontal lobes. At the same time he experienced
for the first time in his life a vivid visual hallucination: ‘a pro­
cession of little men with their hats pulled down over their
eyes, marching diagonally across the field’. It is easy to imagine
that the little men, tired, leaving work, and half asleep, were
symbols of the subject’s exhaustion, easily evoked by the flicker,
while the guards against such fantasy were overpowered by
stern necessity.
   The brain can register fatigue and usually surrenders to it
long before the other organs have called on their reserves; but
we should consider it as being, like sleep, more a positive turn­
ing-off than a negative running-down. The feeling of fatigue
can be accelerated and amplified by boredom, by a monotony
of insignificant signals; it can be postponed or diminished by
drugs such as caffeine and amphetamine, both of which have
slight but measurable effects upon the normal electrical
rhythms of the brain.
   Hypnosis, too, can influence the onset of fatigue. And here
we come on a strange anomaly. The hypnotic trance is a dis­
tinctive state; a hypnotized subject can perform easily feats
212


===== PDF PAGE 213 =====

                                    Beyond the Waking Scene
which he would otherwise find difficult, can support pain which
he would otherwise find intolerable, and recall incidents he had
forgotten. In light anaesthesia, too, such changes are seen. But
whereas an anaesthetic produces regular and striking changes
in the brain rhythms and responses, hypnosis has little or no
effect on them. In most experiments there has been almost no
significant change in the eeg while the subject is Hypnotized,
even when the trance is quite deep and behaviour apparently
much changed. When a hypnotized subject with his eyes closed
is told that they are opened when they are not, his alpha
rhythms continue just as they do in normal conditions, although
he seems to believe what he is told. Conversely, they do not
appear if he is told that his eyes are closed when they are not.
Yet his declared impressions follow the hypnotist’s suggestions
with great fidelity.
   Hypnosis shows none of the electrical features of natural
sleep; indeed, the more carefully we consider the subject’s
state, the less it seems to resemble anything we know of sleep.
Awareness is not lost, but heightened - restricted, it is true, to
specific categories of stimuli, usually the hypnotist’s voice and
suggestions. The significance of events is not reduced, but
absurdly emphasized - the power to learn is extended from its
proper field of significant pattern to any trifle the hypnotist
may fancy. So exaggerated may become the extent of sugges­
tion, that bodily reactions of a serious nature - blisters,
bleeding, cramps, or swellings - may follow on injudicious
suggestions of injury or passion.
   The power of conditioning, as demonstrated by laboratory
experiments, the cult of Yoga, and the ailments of hysterical
origin, seem to share the same mechanisms. In hypnosis, again,
we see how wide and deep is the dominion of the brain over
all other organs and functions. But in this state the rules of
conditioning seem to be waived. There is no reward or punish­
ment, no dignified succession of neutral and specific stimuli.
 In some way the. hypnotist gains access to the inner workings
of the learning mechanism without diverting or distorting the
 basic properties of brain function, so that all the pathways of
association and stores of experience are intact, though their
                                                              213


===== PDF PAGE 214 =====

The Living Brain
contact with the outer world be limited to his chosen vehicle.
It is well known that some people are far more easily hyp­
notized than others and that, with very few exceptions, although
the hypnosis may break the rules of learning, it does not
transcend the boundaries of habit or principle. Few hypnotized
subjects can be made to carry out suggestions which are in­
decent or hangerous according to their standards of conduct
or safety.
   Nobody has yet offered a plausible complete explanation of
the hypnotic state, but an evident invitation to investigation
lies in that readiness to assume significance which has been
emphasized as the dominant attribute of brain function. The
device by which the hypnotist contrives the plasticity of dreams
without the apathy of sleep is a matter for further study and
experiment.
   To many people the evidence of the power of brain over
body is so impressive that it seems to extend itself quite
naturally to another category altogether, the influence of mind
over matter, and to suggest an indefinite merging of such
physiological curiosities as we have outlined into some tran­
scendental realm of spiritual experience. We must confess at
this stage that no study of brain activity has thrown any light
on the peculiar forms of behaviour known variously as second
sight, clairvoyance, telepathy, extra-sensory perception, and
psychokinesis. It has often been suggested by those seeking a
 material basis for otherwise unaccountable behaviour that the
electrical activity of the brain might be the mechanism whereby
 information could be transmitted from brain to brain, and that
 the electrical sensitivity of the brain might be a means of com­
 municating with some all-pervading influence. Quite apart
 from any philosophic objection there may be to such an argu­
 ment, the actual scale and properties of the brain’s electrical
 mechanisms offer no support for it. The size of the electrical
 disturbances which the brain creates is extremely small. In fact,
they are about the size, within the brain itself, of a received
 signal which is just intelligible on an average radio set. More
 crucial even than this, their dominant frequencies are far below
the range of radio channels, below even the scale of audible
214


===== PDF PAGE 215 =====

                                     Beyond the Waking Scene
frequencies. At ten cycles per second, the average frequency
of the alpha rhythms, any electromagnetic signal transmitted
through space would have a wave length of thirty million
metres.
   The familiarity of radio signalling around the world has
popularized the notion that any signal once generated may be
propagated indefinitely through the chasms of space, so that all
events have an eternal quality in some attenuated but identifi­
able form.' This is not even approximately true; for any signal,
however propagated, weakens with its passage until its size falls
below the level of noise and interference in some locality. Be­
yond this point it can never be detected, however great the reso­
lution and selectivity of the receiver. If we consider the largest
rhythms of the brain as casual radio signals, we can calculate
that they would fall below noise level within a few millimetres
from the surface of the head.
   Even if we ignore these physical characteristics, the observa­
tions reported on extra-sensory phenomena seem to exclude
any such approach; for there is no evidence that screening of
the subject, or distance between sender and receiver, have any
influence on the nature or abundance of the effects described.
Furthermore it seems to be one of the cardinal claims of
workers in this field that a signal may be received before it is
transmitted. If we accept these observations for what they are
said to be, we cannot fit them into the physical laws of the
universe as we define them today. We may reject the claims of
transcendental communication on the grounds of experimental
error or statistical fallacy, or we may withhold judgement, or
we may accept them gladly as evidence of spiritual life; but it
does not seem easy to explain them in terms of biological
mechanism.


===== PDF PAGE 216 =====

      10
The Brain Tomorrow
      I should be glad if, when people come
      to a clear understanding in natural
      science, they would stick to the truth,
      and not go transcendent again after
      all has been done in the region of the
      comprehensible.
                 Goethe,     Conversations


The salient physiological facts about the living brain known at
this time of writing have now been told in more or less detail
as their general interest seemed to require. There remain one
or two things to be said about the future, things which might
still be inoffensive to the sage, who did not exclude scientific
prediction from the truth. But first some of the matter about
which, it is hoped, we have come to a clear understanding may
be summarized.
   A sketch of the evolution of the nervous system led us to the
emergence of the human brain and its emancipation from the
menial bodily tasks. Next was traced man’s tardy recognition
of the organ that alone sets him apart from other living things,
the slow rise of interest in it, the rapid development that took
place in electroencephalography as soon as it was realized that
the patterns of electrical activity which the new technique
revealed were not random effects but vital signals, and might
even have among them the physical counterparts of mental
events. In order to see the significance of these patterns, some
elementary facts about brain functions in relation to the sense
organs were given, and some recently devised techniques were
described by which fresh knowledge has been obtained about
such diverse matters as epilepsy, hallucinations, and the scan­
ning functions of the electrical rhythms. The construction of
working models to imitate life, not in appearance but in be­
216


===== PDF PAGE 217 =====

                                          The Brain Tomorrow
haviour, was discussed, and they were found to be not only
imitative but informative.
   Two main paths of research were then traced, stemming
respectively from Berger’s discovery of the electrical rhythms
of the brain and Pavlov’s demonstration of the measurable
conditioning of sensori-motor reflexes; and some little-known
aspects of the latter’s work were described. These two paths
converged in the recognition of a logical affinity between cer­
tain electrical responses and the process of learning - on the
one hand a unique mechanism, on the other a unique function,
of the human brain.
   After considering the scanning theory which this coincidence
suggested, the climax of recent research was reached in an
analytical discussion of the learning process. Laboratory ob­
servations and experiments had made it seem necessary to
postulate a minimum of seven operations in the mechanism of
learning. A working model was described in which the perform­
ance of these seven operations had been provided for. Here
again, even at this high level of reflex complexity, the model
not only satisfied all the theoretical requirements predicated but
discovered phenomena for which no arrangement had been
made - phenomena which nevertheless were found to corre­
spond with those of the living brain under similar experimental
conditions.
   In traditional physiology the equivalence of similar organs
is implicit; apart from matters of taste, all idiosyncrasies are
pathological. In the brain, one is tempted to say, the reverse is
true, or at least more true; idiosyncrasy is the rule and equality
a myth. The brain is essentially the organ of personality. So
brain physiology necessarily takes note of the variations norm­
ally found from brain to brain; and it was shown that already
an entirely new stock of data had been accumulated concerning
measurable differences of personality. These intimations were
found to be already plentiful and positive enough to suggest
the possibilities of a scheme for grouping characters at various
ages, not in correspondence with any of the divers groupings
of professional or academic psychology, with which indeed
no correlation has yet been found, but on its own basis of
                                                               217


===== PDF PAGE 218 =====

The Living Brain
 measurable results in experiments that can be tested by repeti­
 tion and cannot be thwarted by coaching.
    Some thoughts about the future of the brain may have
 occurred to the reader at this point. There is one obvious aspect
 of the matter. When some of the new facts about the develop­
 ment of character become generally known - for instance, that
tendencies to violence can be detected, that self-indulgence and
self-control can be measured, together with the effects of en­
couraging or discouraging them - the brain specialist, be he
psychiatrist or physiologist, will be bound to concern himself
with its future treatment, particularly in education. But what
of other implications?
    After bowing to Goethe’s sage predilection, and after what
has been said in the preceding chapter about transcendental
phenomena, we must not let prediction merge into prophecy.
The difference is of course fundamental. Prediction is an ex­
treme of reason, prophecy an extreme of emotion. Extremes
meet only when the mind is clouded; at other times we know
whether the brain is fulfilling its own essential function of pre­
diction or is serving the elemental cause of the emotions.
   The evolution of the human brain itself, and the course of
our knowledge of it, converge momentously today, reacting on
each other. The brain is not what it is by virtue of any informed
planning; its education has been evolved without regard for
its functional constitution, about which nothing relevant was
known ten years ago. This cannot go on. For teachers and
educationists throughout the ages the brain has been a Black
Box; its working has been known only by comparing output
with input. The brain came to maturity in complete ignorance
of its own existence; its training has been empirical and in­
ferential.
    When tracing the processes of learning in a previous chapter,
a point was reached where it could be said that the critical
operation was the recognition of pattern, an abstraction. This
was advanced without thought of any parallel in the evolution
of the brain itself; but there is in fact a very striking one, an
abstraction at a critical phase which may be regarded as a func­
tional recapitulation of the organ’s growth. Freed by homeo­
218


===== PDF PAGE 219 =====

                                          The Brain Tomorrow
stasis for intellectual pursuits, the supreme abstraction of the
brain was indeed the mind. And mens sana until recently has
been the only watchword. But changes are taking place in which
the material success of psychosurgery is significant. From the
confusion of metaphysics and psychoanalysis, abstractions of
an abstraction, the thinking brain has turned eagerly to the first
possible glimpses of itself. The millennial period of its un­
conscious evolution ends before the mirror; a new phase
begins.
   The educationist is of course primarily interested in this con­
vergent crisis, of which the crisis in education itself is a symp­
tom. When we consider what has been achieved in that field,
the mas^ improvement and the peaks of individual achieve­
ment, the method of the Black Box must be revered; and many
of course will want it to be retained; a Black Box and a familiar
abstraction make fewer demands on one’s time and attention
than does a living brain and its unfamiliar functions. Also there
is some apprehension, as among the spiritual-minded in the
days of anatomical ambition to locate the dwelling-place of the
mind, that one might look into the Black Box and find it empty.
For those who think the learning process is incomplete because
an idea emerges from an abstraction, ‘mind’ is a necessary
but is not an ultimate conception; intellectual materialists, for
them the spirit must always be made flesh; of all miracles,
transubstantiation is the most comforting. Or they may ‘ration­
alize’. As Crawshay-Williams put it in The Comforts of Un­
reason, the word ‘mind, though originally a label for a com­
plex of mental events, often becomes hypostatized into an
entity’ and, he adds, referring to Eddington’s disclaimer of the
larger entities of orthodox religion, ‘once an immaterial entity
is born it is surely futile to excuse it by saying that it is only
a little one’.
   We are not going out of our way to nurse this indiscretion;
psychological baby-sitters are legion. Any discussion of mind
except as a function - the supreme function - of brain, lies
beyond the scope of this work and must always remain outside
the purview of physiology. The physiologist, viewing in his
modest workshop the inexplicable electric tides that sweep
                                                              219


===== PDF PAGE 220 =====

The Living Brain
 through the living brain, knows that the bobbing of his float
must mean some Leviathan is yet uncaught; some great idea
nibbles his bait and slides darkly behind the laughing waves.
 But he would be happier not to dub it Mind; he would prefer to
call the one that got away - Mentality, thinking of it only as a
 relation of dimensions, in the same class as Velocity. We speak
often of the ‘craze for speed’, but only a truly mad mechanic
would peer into his engine for the component of its velocity.
So, even in a fever of interest in mental problems, no sane
physiologist would look for a mechanism identifiable as Mind;
but he may quite reasonably say: ‘At one time behaviour was
so\ later it was thus - the transformation of one mode into the
other I will call Mentality.’ In the chapter on models of be­
haviour we saw how even in the very simplest system, with
two active elements, multiple interconnexion between elements
gave several modes for which simple observation was useless.
The study of mentality, product of interlaced patterns far too
numerous even to write down, cannot therefore be defined, let
alone solved, by contemplation of behaviour, however patient
the experimenter, however sensitive his instruments.
   Nor is the proposition made any clearer or more tractable by
glib assertions about studying the organism ‘as a whole’. In
revulsion from the cult of dissection, of particulate experiments
on isolated bits of physiological mechanism, a holistic approach
is a natural over-compensation; but it is not practical strategy.
No team of experimenters can tackle all aspects of brain physi­
ology at once. Norbert Wiener has very properly stigmatized
holism as a bogy: ‘If a phenomenon can only be grasped as a
whole and is completely unresponsive to analysis, there is no
suitable material for any scientific description of it; for the
whole is never at our disposal. However, it is always possible
for a slovenly worker to sweep the crumbs of his ignorance
behind those parts of the phenomenon which are accessible
to us.’
   If, and in so far as, mentality must be defined as a function
of the whole assembly of possible brain conditions, then, and
to that extent, attempts to describe mentality in physiological
terms are vain. But, as already seen, to an increasing and still
220


===== PDF PAGE 221 =====

                                         The Brain Tomorrow
surprising extent, mental phenomena are acessible to analysis,
can be studied in groups of manageable size, can be predicted
from experimental observations.
   Though we cannot expect to inquire into all the phenomena
all the time, technical stratagems are available which permit
study of nearly all the phenomena for a short time, or of some
phenomena for nearly all the time. All the while, diversionary
attacks in patrol strength are kept up in hundreds of clinics and
laboratories, and from their captures is being built up a system
of intelligence and espionage which is reducing little by little
the domain of the central enigma. We have seen that the intri­
cacies of learning and abstraction, the perspectives of person­
ality and imagination, the labyrinth of original fantasy, can
all be explored and charted in objective records.
   Some tracts of these regions are less accessible than others;
advance parties have scarcely done more than establish depots
for the benefit of their successors. But there is no insuperable
obstacle to be seen. The operations of learning indicated that
the evolution of novel and effective ideas and behaviour de­
pends upon the continuous assessment by the brain of the like­
lihood that several events are significantly related. Significance
is a matter of regular repetition, of patterns against chaos.
Quite simple models can be seen to extract meaning from co­
incidence, and snatch the little that is possibly true from the
much that is probably false.
   Simple machines go no further than this. From a statistic one
may conjecture, but should not assert, a cause. But the notion
of causality lurks not far behind these operations. When
thunder is always and only preceded by lightning, a man or a
machine legitimately infers that flash means bang; to go a step
further and inquire whether flash causes bang, is a temptation
to which both flesh and metal are inevitably exposed. The Swiss
 psychologist Piaget has shown that children do in fact construct
 their ideas of causality in this way, by an ingenuous develop­
 ment from post to propter.
   Wise men, too, are apt to conjure a cause from a constant
 antecedent. The wisest of them include in such arguments the
 reservation that when two events are constantly associated they
                                                              221


===== PDF PAGE 222 =====

The Living Brain
may be the joint effects of a common cause, and to this they are
inclined to give a name which may be Zeus in one age or Elec­
tricity in another. The more sophisticated successors to our
child-like models, as a possible consequence of their abstractive
power, if they do not discover their maker will evolve their own
deus ex machina. Such a deity may be defined as the rate of loss
of detail and certainly due to repeated reflection in a system
of infinite regress. Warren McCulloch has reminded us that
Spinoza called consciousness an idea of ideas, and Bertrand
Russell has warned us of the danger inherent in statements
which are themselves members of the class to which they refer.
For those who find such exercises refreshing, the generation of
transcendental propositions by mechanical contrivances may
prove a welcome change from merely human perplexities.
   The practical consequences of physiological infiltration into
philosophical domains will be only as serious as the community
cares to make them. But it may be assumed that no mental
theory or practice is likely to survive which does not take into
account the principles of cerebral functions revealed by physio­
logy any more than the practice of medicine can ignore other
physical functions. Already the new type of psychiatrist, in
touch with centres of physiological research, has adopted a new
outlook. The impact has not yet reached the great conservative
body of that profession, and perhaps never will do so, especi­
ally in the United States where psychiatry spread in a sweet
flood of affluence and crystallized hard. But one may look
forward with certainty to the time when brain physiology will
be at least as much of a prescribed subject for the psychological
and medical student as general physiology is for the latter to­
day. This will produce psychiatrists as well informed about the
organ of mentality as the medical practitioner is about the
organs with which he has to deal. Perhaps, later still, there will
come an integration of the two sciences in a single science of
health based, not merely on familiarity with pathological con­
ditions of mind and body, but on a full understanding of whole­
some life and how the errors and chances of unhealth can be
mitigated, avoided, or exploited. Sapience, as it was noted when
first distinguishing between the human and other brains, has
222


===== PDF PAGE 223 =====

                                          The Brain Tomorrow
just that capacity: we can make our errors in a thought and
reject them in another thought, leaving no trace of error in us.
   Frequent efforts to integrate or combine the sundry schools
and disciplines of scientific and mental theory have been made.
The loop of Cybernetics joins many of the subjects by their less
tattered corners and has promoted many valuable and other­
wise improbable intimacies. America is a great incubator of
synthetic cultures. In the latest of these, the Dianetics of Hub­
bard, there appears to be both a nominal and a formal solecism.
The aim was apparently to unite the principles and practices of
Freud, Jung, Adler, Pavlov, Behaviourism, Faith Healing,
Christian Science, Autosuggestion, Yoga, and Theosophy into
a single practical system of analysis and treatment. The result­
ant is the lowest common multiple of all these cults, incorpor­
ating their crudities and exaggerations, ignoring their subtleties
and implications. This is something to beware of, for what we
need is to preserve and cultivate just these growing-points of
science, not to arrange in arbitrary style, like cut flowers, their
sterile and exotic efflorescence.
   But this borderland of the unpredictable is far from the
planned field of education. Here the future can be more reason­
ably discussed, for the profession is more reasonable than any
other, miracles not being demanded of the teacher as of priest
or medicine-man. Patiently throughout the ages he has watched
the input and output of generations of Black Boxes, varying
the input according to results by guess and by God. To have
brought so many millions to such a promising level of mental
training, and with so few casualties, is an achievement beyond
the success of any other profession. In these days, however, the
casualties are increasing, as every teacher knows. There are
those who are put out of action - the defectives and delinquents
who will never return to normal school life. There are the
 wounded - children who may be the brightest and boldest of
the class, whose feelings are hurt and frustrated by its restric­
tions. And there are the missing, the few already left behind,
 the many stragglers still vainly shepherded.
   An instance has been given of the manner in which brain
physiology can be useful in the understanding of delinquent
                                                               223


===== PDF PAGE 224 =====

The Living Brain
children. By the same kind of approach that led, through loca­
tion of tumours and other clinical aids, to better knowledge of
the human brain, the study of normal childhood is now being
reached. It promises in particular, assistance in the problems of
unhappy, backward, and brilliant children, problems that multi­
ply as the integrity of the family is corrupted and pressure on
the school system increases. Just when teachers are becoming
more aware than ever before that nearly every child, and
especially every unusual child, would benefit from individual
attention, they are being asked to take larger and larger classes.
They know that, try as they may, even when the mind is most
tender, they cannot mould them all alike; and physiology en­
dorses this result of their Black Box observations. Only in a
totalitarian country would that be possible, using its appropriate
shallow mould. Doubtless for every Nazi fanatic was sacrificed
an anonymous hecatomb. Moscow does not publish casualty
lists, but we know enough about the working brain to predict
that a scheme of education based on misinterpretation of Pav­
lov and denial of Mendel is liable to produce mental disorder
in proportion with the imbecility of the premises. For this im­
plies that totalitarian education must be based in principle upon
trying to condition a fault in the conditioning mechanism of the
brain, and a fault in this, it was found, is the one physiological
activity that cannot be conditioned. You may learn nothing,
and get away with it; but you cannot in sanity learn not to learn.
The mechanism breaks down, sooner or later, when these
natural functions are tampered with; the mind is flattened into
a shallow mould; anything can mean anything and untruth be
truth.
   Western education, compounding cultural individualism and
Christian egalitarianism, does not deny heredity and the recog­
nition of types, but is in serious difficulty about reconciling
political equality with a classification of types. The English
system, of which selective breeding was the base and personal
tutoring the pinnacle, has broken with that preferential tradi­
tion and now, in the name of equality of opportunity, attempts
to separate sheep and goats at the early age of eleven. Clerical
examination is notoriously fallacious in inverse proportion with
224


===== PDF PAGE 225 =====

                                         The Brain Tomorrow
the age of the subject, and if we are, anyhow, to create new
castes it would obviously be wiser to have more than two. Here,
meanwhile, the assistance of brain physiology can be offered
with assurance in present conditions and as a help in bettering
them. In the pressing problem of the backward or unusual child,
take this case, for example: A boy was sent for eeg examina­
tion because he was so backward that there was anxiety about
the state of his mind; at the age of nine he could not read. How
should he be classified? The results of intelligence tests un­
equivocally classed him as defective, since he could not even
read the questions. His brain record revealed nothing more
ominous than large persistent alpha rhythms, suggesting that he
was a pronounced P-type, like Peggy in our fable. That was all.
Being a persistent non-visualist, it was useless trying to teach
him to read pictorially. Properly taught, as an abstract thinker,
he may turn out to be a Senior Wrangler.
   Individual education aimed at the development of under­
standing and expression in selected pupils; mass education has
a more limited goal - the training and tuning of all as selective
receivers. To an increasing extent the measure of literacy is
becoming the ability to read instructions rather than the power
to report observations or express opinions. The cynical justifica­
tion for this evolution is that only a minority can be expected
to observe anything worth reporting or to have any opinions
worth expressing. Experience and statistics may support this
contention, but if its application is not to stultify pupils and
teachers alike, means must be found to extricate from the
button-mould the exceptions needed to prove the rule, to test
any such generalization to breaking point.
   The whole system of civilized life depends, as we all know,
on communication; but, unlike the channels of the brain, it is
becoming more and more a one-way communication, from the
top and centre down and out to the inert receivers who, even
in the best conditions, can respond only by a unitary vote. It
has been suggested that the greater an animal’s brain the more
its survival depends on the nature of its play. Human society
devotes an enormous proportion of time and energy to play.
In Western countries the invention of concerted music, team
   L.B. - 8
                                                              225


===== PDF PAGE 226 =====

The Living Brain
games, and family holidays is recent, and already, it seems,
precarious. Perhaps the most ominous feature of mechanized
civiljzation is that the ludicrous devices demanded for enter­
tainment do not lend themselves to two-way operation.
   Society seemed for a time to reflect in its diversity, plasticity,
and adaptability the generosity of brain function; now it seems
to be degenerating into something more like a spinal cord, able
to receive instructions and implement reflex coordination but
incapable of initiating any independent or original idea. A
passive solitary child gazing at the screen of a television receiver
amuses only itself - the need to gaze does not promote or evoke
habits of creativeness or generosity. True, to those who com­
plain that things are not what they used to be, there is always
the reply that they never were. What we fear from mechanical
entertainment may well have been foretold as a consequence of
writing and printing, of gramophones and radio. But have not
these forebodings been to a great extent confirmed? The more
artistic expression comes to depend on special technical devices,
the more restricted is participation in it. Habits of play that
depend upon mechanized art and professional sport have no
need for private dreams and make-believe. H. L. Mencken once
remarked that the more a man dreams the less he believes; so
perhaps the less a child’s make-believe, the more readily he will
later grasp at ready-made beliefs. For Alice in Movieland the
future looks drab; Tom Sawyer will have few adventures at
the television set.
   The notion of a past Golden Age of individuality and enter­
prise, however, has but flimsy foundations; for most, those
times were dross, or leaden oppression. Our libraries contain
the cream of the past: naturally we find the whole milk of the
present thin in comparison and the processed cheese of the
future an indigestible substitute.
   In what ways, then, can knowledge of brain physiology help
to predict and control the course of history? The tentative
classification of simple brain records has indicated a wide
prospect of diverse and fluctuating personalities. Intelligence, as
estimated by arbitrary and already obsolescent tests, finds no
parallel in our tracings; but versatility, ductility, and certain
226


===== PDF PAGE 227 =====

                                          The Brain Tomorrow
special imaginative aptitudes, are beginning to be recognized
as dynamic inter-relations and transformations within the
framework of normal variation. Note that the classes so
adumbrated are not based on what a person can or cannot do,
but on the ways of doing things. Further, nothing suggests that
one type or one way is better than another. The voice of the
physiologist is scarcely more than a whisper; but, if it were
called upon to testify, it would derive equality of responsibility
from diversity of endowment. To each, it would murmur,
according to his capacity, from each according to his needs.
   The factors we seem to recognize, and more particularly the
names we give them, may be superseded as understanding
widens, but whatever changes further experience may dictate
the picture will not be any less variegated; and it is in helping
to select the more exceptional and less hardy strains for culture
that the brain physiologist may find the most exhilarating
challenge. The late Dr Montessori initiated her revolution in
free discipline and sensory training by raising the attainment
of mental defectives to the level of the State examinations in
Italy at the turn of the century. The physiology of the brain
suggests that the success of her empirical methods was due to
the simultaneous exploitation of the individual characters and
the common properties of her pupils’ brains.
   Amplified by understanding of the basic functions involved,
the physiological training of unusual brains may have results
that are quite unforeseeable. We are so accustomed to medio­
crity as the arithmetic mean of our neighbours’ limitations,
that we can scarcely conceive of the intellectual power of a
brain at full throttle. Natural geniuses are personally known to
few, and their capacity can be estimated only by their peers.
Most of them confess to disabilities which would be fatal in
most circumstances. Of the one per cent of our population that
we should expect to excel, only a small proportion reach years
of discretion undistorted by their upbringing. The ten per cent
that we class as defective but capable of education, are as often
as not tormented by competing outside their class or type and
add the neurosis of inferiority to the modesty of their under­
standing.
                                                              227


===== PDF PAGE 228 =====

The Living Brain
   In those few effective outstanding personalities whose brain
functions we have been privileged to study, versatility of both
function and brain activity seems the only common factor. In
most people an analysis of thirty seconds of brain activity is
enough to provide a representative sample; in that time, left
to itself, the brain goes through its modest repertory of motions.
But in the efficient genius brain, the motto seems to be semper
aliquid novi\ several minutes of analysis are needed before the
picture begins to repeat itself, even in the most tranquil condi­
tions. We are beginning to have some insight into what Mar­
gery Fry has called the ‘climate of delinquency’, and education
establishes a seed-bed for gifted specialists. It is surely time
that we studied also the conditions which favour the develop­
ment of the versatile genius.
   Do such suggestions imply or depend upon the predominance
of hereditary influences? So far, it is true, the study of brain
physiology has tended to emphasize the importance of genetic
factors. Lennox, who was one of the first to explore the elec­
trical accompaniments of epilepsy, even went so far as to assert
that ‘the electroencephalogram is a hereditary trait’, and to
urge that an eeg be taken of every citizen as a condition for
granting a marriage licence. This bias in favour of nature as
opposed to nurture may be justified by further experiment, but
so far no crucial observations have been reported; even those
on identical twins are inconclusive.
   At the present time this assumption of genetic prepotence is
a hindrance to the development of anything like a physiological
sociology. Environmental influences are so much easier to
criticize and control; they provide a safe battleground for the
social reformer and the revolutionary. The popular view is that,
apart from a few hard cases, the majority of unhappy or anti­
social people are the victims of circumstance and can be
restored to conformity by circumstantial adjustment. This as­
sumption is based on the hopeful and kindly ethic of Western
civilization, derived from Christian doctrine and enshrined in
statute law, as in everyday habit. One may describe it as the
‘ewe-lamb’ hypothesis as opposed to the less attractive ‘black
sheep’ theory.
228


===== PDF PAGE 229 =====

                                          The Brain Tomorrow
   It is much easier to classify influences than to understand
them. The crude division of all human attributes into ‘inherited’
and ‘acquired’ is excusable but quite unreasonable. Even in
the simple models of behaviour we have described, it is often
quite impossible to decide whether what the model is doing is
the result of its design or of its experience. Such a categoriza­
tion is in fact meaningless when use influences design, and
design use. We can infer the existence in human nature of
intricate interaction between inherited and acquired charac­
ters, if only from the fervour with which adherents of both
causes deny .the truth of their opponent’s testimony. In such a
system, when variables are subject to mutual influence, it is
characteristic that the denials of both sides should turn out to
be false and their assertions true; for quite superficial observa­
tion reveals that almost anything may happen, whereas the
most painstaking analysis is necessary for anyone to define
what is impossible.
   A reasonable question for us to ask is: what chance is there
of the human brain evolving further? As far as is known today,
there are two ways in which evolution can take place. First,
by the occurrence of major mutations or sports important
enough to increase the chances of survival of the individual
and to produce a new species. Second, by selection and hybrid­
ization of minor mutations to produce a new variety. The
fundamental difference between the two mechanisms is that,
while the first initiates a species with a different gene structure
which can no longer breed with the parent stock, the second
produces only slowly a new variety which can still breed with
the original.
   All human beings are one species, interfertile and mutually
attractive, as the great variety of half-breeds testifies. The dif­
ferences between ethnic groups are mainly in hair and hide,
and since the brain is developed from embryonic tissues similar
to those which give rise to skin and hair, we might expect some
difference between the brains of, say, Caucasian, Mongol, and
African. Slight differences there do seem to be, as Mundy-
Castle has found in Africa, but scarcely more than can be ac­
counted for by the varying traditions and standards of life and
                                                               229


===== PDF PAGE 230 =====

 The Living Brain
nourishment. And did not the brains of these people establish
 and elaborate these traditions, accept or modify these
standards? Unluckily for our peace of mind, there do exist
 precipitous gradients of economic and political differences; but
brain physiology detects no incompatibilities; indeed in regions
where the shades and textures of the human race are freely
blended, there is found the richest variety, the most lively
growth.
   The appearance of a new human species with an even larger
and more adaptable brain seems extremely unlikely, short of
major catastrophe. Such an offspring would be sterile unless
it met a similarly improbable mate. The fate of a sport or
monster of this type, moreover, in relatively peaceful condi­
tions would doubtless be to languish in a colony of mental
defectives or lunatics. The super-brain would almost certainly
need a superior and protracted education. Arithmetical prodi­
gies only prove the rule; their specialized talent, unlike the
versatility of genius, seems to need little education. From pre­
ape to man, the period of mental adolescence has increased
tenfold; to exploit a similar evolutionary jump now toward
after-man would probably entail a century of super-schooling.
For dramatic brain evolution to have any chance of survival,
more than a swollen head would be needed; we should have to
consider not only Man and Superman but Back to Methuselah.
The whole anatomy and physiology of our bodies would have
to be modified to maintain life for millennia and support not
merely the weight of a heavier head but the accumulating stress
and burden of encyclopedic wisdom perpetually displayed. A
centenarian schoolboy is a freak few of us would welcome and
only a planetary cataclysm could foster such a monster.
   Minor changes over a great span of years are no doubt pro­
ceeding continuously; it is to be assumed that the brain which
can influence environment will continue to be adaptable to
changes of environment. Two particulars of its present limita­
tions have been mentioned earlier. One of them was the excep­
tional sensory relation between touch and brain; the puritan
movement and modem sophistication are protests against this
vestigial enthralment, and may well come to have survival
230


===== PDF PAGE 231 =====

                                         The Brain Tomorrow
value in a rational world. The other particular was the limita­
tion of speed imposed on our sensory and mental reactions by
the rate of the alpha rhythms. A faster rhythm has unquestion­
able survival value in a way of life calling for ever speedier
decisions and actions. The action difference between an alpha
rhythm of eight c/s and one of thirteen c/s can be estimated,
for instance, in the emergency of stopping a car: at fifty miles
an hour a driver with the faster rhythm would stop his car five
feet short of the point reached by a driver with the slower
rhythm. Similarly, pedestrians and cyclists with the faster alpha
rhythms have a better chance of escape.
   The chances of a major mutation being advantageous are
rarely better than one in a million, and in normal circum­
stances the human mutation rate is very slow. Conceivably, if
a populous, fertile, and temperate part of the planet were
isolated from the rest of an atomized world, and for a time
subjected to considerable gamma radiation, viable sports with
superior brains might survive long enough to propagate their
kind, supplant their ephemeral forbears, and later populate
this or other worlds. Such events have been imagined often
enough in fiction and we may suppose that anything we can
imagine is remotely possible; indeed in the very remote future
changes of this order are inevitable, and may already have
happened in some other place.
   Our imagination and perhaps our hopes may stray toward
the people of the stars, but our concern is not with these. For
us, and any that we may call ours, the future is more placid;
yet more arduous. The foreseeable future of brain is more a
matter of hard study and design. We need not yearn for greater
masses of grey matter - we already dispose of enough nerve
units to enumerate in their permutations every particle of Ed­
dington's universe. More probably the next chapters of brain
history will be not so unlike the first; the theme has been, is,
and probably will be, delegation without specialization.
   During the last two generations the rate of accumulation of
knowledge has been so colossally accelerated that not even the
most noble and most tranquil brain can now store and consider
even a thousandth part of it. Humanity is in a critical state
                                                             231


===== PDF PAGE 232 =====

The Living Brain
compared with which the constitution of the Dinosaur and the
community of the Tower of Babel were triumphant. Our first
response to the challenge of this deluge has been a tactical
success, though it contains the seeds of strategic disaster -
specialization without delegation, the inversion of pragmatic
justice. The professor in his lair can always find an expert or
an abstract to patch the gaps that inevitably yawn in his know­
ledge as his subject swells; but, to provide his auxiliaries, other
professors must train the experts to write the abstracts - and
bewilderment mounts in rapidly widening spirals. The econo­
mics of information has its Gresham’s Law, too - half-truths
drive out full understanding.
   Continuation of the sectarian process of specialization could
only lead to one result, the creation of an irresponsible scientific
priesthood, preoccupied entirely with its liturgy and its
mysteries; and, in due course, to a popular revulsion from
scientific knowledge and a slump of scientific credit that would
usher in a dark age as vicious and prolonged as the aftermath
of an atomic war.
    The root of this evil is that facts accumulate at a far higher
rate than does the understanding of them. Rational thought
depends literally on ratio, on the proportions and relations be­
tween things. As facts are collected, the number of possible re­
lations between them increases at an enormous rate. When all
but a few relations can be excluded as ‘impossible’, the subject
they relate to is called easy; but such confident exclusion has
so often proved wrong in the past that scientific workers are
loath to deny possibilities. The remedy would seem to be to
 avoid burdening human brains with mechanical tasks. As
 Wiener has passionately declared, to do this is to stultify science
 and corrupt human relations. There are already plans for in­
 struments to end this bondage of the brain, for delegating to
 machinery the menial but essential tasks of fact arrangement
 and appraisal, as the management of our bodies long since was
 delegated. Even quite simple equipment will give judgements
 at least as good as our own on the validity of our hypotheses,
 and suggestions as to how we can improve them and plan better
 experiments.
232


===== PDF PAGE 233 =====

                                          The Brain Tomorrow
   Such machines have been decried and ridiculed, prostituted
to the computation of mass destruction, and fictionalized into
superhuman idiocy and malevolence. As a child frightened by
a teased puppy will say he met a bear, so we tend to project into
these docile slaves of the laboratory our feelings of guilt, appre­
hension, inferiority, and insignificance. In fact they are domestic
servants as truly the friend of man as are the dogs and horses
he has fashioned from the raw material of animal species. Some
of the more modest gear, designed specially for the study of
brain functions, has been described here; in all such equipment
there is the shadow of a brain to which can be delegated some
mechanical duties - otherwise we should take a lifetime to sort
out the data from a week’s work.
   There is also more personal cooperation. The incursion of
higher mathematics and new algebras into what we thought was
a quiet experimental science, is horrifying to those of us whose
education in these arts was neglected. However, vre have
powerful allies, mathematicians and engineers of high standing.
Wiener, Pitts, Mackay, Shannon, Weaver, Rashevsky and his
school, have all blazed trails into the new territory. The para­
lysis or revulsion which assails most of us when a mathematical
concept flashes out from behind our blinkers is allayed by the
efforts of such masters of popular exposition as Bronowski and
Hoyle who, appreciating the strangeness and novelty of such
notions, insinuate most gently into their discourses the relation
between the basic abstractions of mathematics and the material
entities of the living brain. The schoolroom bogeys of irrational
and imaginary numbers need no longer intimidate those who
have seen a brain manipulating incoming signals to extract
from them a notion of number and meaning.
   The extreme specialization and segregation of the present
epoch is a novelty in human affairs. If left unmitigated it could
spell ruin. But the remedy is traditional in principle, an exten­
sion of custom rather than a revolution. Libraries, almost as
old as the history of the race, are, in a sense, the racial memory.
Their importance and power may be gauged by the hostility
they have evoked and the fury with which they have been at­
tacked by established or upstart authority; the Burning of Books
                                                               233


===== PDF PAGE 234 =====

The Living Brain
has been a standard sacrifice of the tyrant from Alexandria to
Berlin. Libraries solved for many generations the problem of
laborious copying by hand; printing dealt as surely with the
rebirth of curiosity. For each emergency the brain of man in­
vents a remedy, a technique of delegation, so as to maintain
intact its unspecialized competence.
   In the present crisis, which threatens that faculty more seri­
ously than ever it was threatened in the past, something more
than an overgrown racial memory is needed; no mere library of
facts and opinions will constrain and direct the explosive force
of scientific exploration. The machines that flash and click in
our laboratories now are the first forms of the living brain’s
extended life, the rudiments of racial understanding, as Guten­
berg’s first printing presses were the forerunners of the Re­
formation.
  The storage and arrangement of facts is familiar to us,
whether in print or on film or on cards; but the mechanization
of understanding, the use of machines to determine significance,
abstract meaning, and conduct logical arguments, is as strange
and repulsive to many people as the notion of movable type
was five centuries ago. Yet we have seen that in their simpler
forms these intellectual processes can be analysed and imitated
without great difficulty.
  The exteriorization of tedious or controversial reasoning will
no doubt have as profound an effect upon the brain and society
as the introduction of skilled and respectful servants has on a
humble household. No man, we may suppose, will be a genius
to his own machine, and mediocre thinkers will be as hard hit
as imperfect scribes were by the printing press. But the future
of the brain is more intriguing than a mere holiday from drudg­
ery, for it is only when the servants of thought have done
their work and retired unobtrusively to their quarters that the
master brain can discover its own place and settle down at last
to its proper work.
   That is a reflection of the laboratory, but it is not the end of
the matter. The proper study of mankind, if we are creatures
of purpose, has its proper application. Enough is known today
about the living brain to reduce material waste and human
234


===== PDF PAGE 235 =====

                                        The Brain Tomorrow
misery - in education, in correction, and in the development of
mature personal relations. In an epoch of rapidly expanding
human power, the application of this new and growing self-
knowledge will concern not only the domestic or national future
but the destiny of the human species.


===== PDF PAGE 236 =====

      APPENDIX A


An Electric Model of Nerve

In general, it is legitimate to study a model of a mysterious pro­
cess if three conditions are fulfilled: 1. Several features of the
mystery must be known. 2. The model must contain the abso­
lute minimum of working parts to reproduce the known fea­
tures. 3. The model must reproduce other features, either as
predictions, or as unexpected combinations.
   There are several legitimate models of nerve. The earliest
ones were simple circuits containing resistance and capacitance,
and copied only the passive properties of nerve - they did not
propagate an impulse or even suggest how an impulse would be
propagated. They had the advantage of drawing attention to
the similarity of a nerve to a leaky cable such as a submarine
telegraph line. Since the mathematical equations relating to
leaky cables were worked out during the last century, physio­
logists could apply rigorous and well-tested notions to those
passive features of nerve which the ‘leaky cable’ models re­
produced. Later, electrochemical models were discovered. The
best known of these is, incongruously enough, an iron wire in
strong nitric acid. The acid forms an oxide film on the wire so
that the iron within does not dissolve. This film is ‘passive’ but
breaks down when scratched or stimulated electrically, for ex­
ample, when the wire is touched with a piece of zinc. When
the wire is stimulated, an impulse passes quite quickly down it,
and this impulse has many of the properties of a nerve impulse:
it is a vortex ring of electrochemical action. During the passage
of the impulse the passive film is decomposed momentarily, and
the nitric acid attacks the iron with the evolution of nitric oxide.
A fresh passive film is formed and this is ‘refractory’ for a short
time; the wire cannot propagate another impulse immediately
236


===== PDF PAGE 237 =====

                                                            A ppendix
after one has passed by. This is a good dynamic model but has
the disadvantage that the nature of the passive film is almost as
mysterious as the nerve fibre itself; it is not very satisfactory to
equate two unknowns.
   It is possible to retain the simplicity of the leaky cable models
and add to them a dynamic element to represent the mechanism
in a nerve which provides the miniature electrochemical explo-

        THRKB ELEMENTS 0? MODEL TO SHOW EXCITATION AID PROPAGATION




                 Figure 18. Circuit of Model Nerve


sion seen as an impulse. The circuit of a working model is
shown in Figure 18. The capacitors and resistors provide the
elements of a leaky cable, and the battery maintains a steady
voltage such that the ‘inside’ of the model is negative to the
outside. The addition to the circuit which endows it with the
power to propagate an impulse is the neon tube, also connected,
in effect, between the inside and outside and biased to a few
Yolts below its striking voltage, which, in the case of the minia­
ture tubes used for the embodiment of this circuit, is between
fifty and sixty volts. Every element (consisting of resistors Rp
                                                                     237


===== PDF PAGE 238 =====

The Living Brain
R2, R3, R4, the neon tube, and the capacitor C) is connected to
the adjacent elements on both sides through the capacitors C2,
C3 and C4, C5. These capacitors join points of opposite polarity
of the neon tubes, so that they may be envisaged as being in the
form of a criss-cross connexion, a sort of lazy-tongs arrange­
ment extending down the chain of elements.
   Providing all the neon tubes are below their striking voltage,
the system is stable and inert. If, however, a voltage is applied
as indicated by the external battery Bt or B2, the voltage across
one of the neon tubes rises, and when it reaches the striking
threshold the tube ionizes and partially discharges the capacitor
Cr When the tube ionizes the voltage across it drops to the
extinction level. This voltage drop is applied to adjacent tubes
through C2, C3 and C4, C5, in such a sense as to increase the
voltage across them (owing to the criss-cross connexion) and
they accordingly strike in their turn. The impulse is thus propa­
gated to both ends of the chain at a velocity depending on the
values of the capacitors and resistors.
   In the working model which has the values shown in the
figure the conduction time is about 0-2 m. sec. for an element.
The action potential has a duration of about 10 m. sec. - rather
longer than most nerves; the absolutely refractory period is
about 5 m. sec. and the relatively refractory period about 15
m. sec. Twenty such elements represent five to ten centimetres
of frog motor nerve at about 10°C. The action potential,
excitability characteristics, chronaxie, accommodation, space
constant, and so forth, have values which are interrelated in
much the same way as in a nerve. The size and effectiveness of
the impulse at any point depend only on the state of the element
at that point, so that propagation is decrement-less and all-or-
none.
   A synapse may be formed by omitting one of the capacitors
such as C2 or C3. If then the threshold of the element on one
side of the half-break is raised by lowering the bias voltage it
can be stimulated by an impulse arriving from the unchanged
side and can just stimulate on the other side through the single
capacitor; it cannot, however, be stimulated through the single
capacitor. Propagation is therefore unidirectional and is then
238


===== PDF PAGE 239 =====

                                                        A ppendix
found to be frequency-sensitive. Very low and very high rates
of stimulation are relatively ineffective and there is a fairly
marked optimum range of stimulation rate. This implies facil­
itation; two impulses may be effective when one is not. A
junction between several such chains exhibits all the properties
of simple reflex systems, such as recruitment and occlusion.
   Inhibition may also be demonstrated. Wedensky inhibition is
seen when the threshold of one element in a continuous chain
is raised. A low-frequency train of impulses will pass this de­
pressed element, but a high-frequency one will not. An in­
hibitory synapse is made by connecting a single capacitor from
the positive side of one element to the positive side of another.
A train of impulses in the lpre-synaptic’ stretch then inhibits a
spontaneous discharge on the other side of the inhibitory link;
the degree of inhibition is a function of the frequency of the
impulses in the pre-synaptic stretch.
   Spontaneous activity is easily produced by raising the bias
voltage of one tube so that it regularly strikes and discharges
its condenser, which then charges up again, and so forth, as in
the simplest relaxation oscillator circuit. The top limit of spon­
taneous discharge frequency is fixed by the absolutely refrac­
tory period and in the actual model is about 200 impulses per
second.
   Altogether the model seems to display eighteen or so of the
known properties of nervous and synaptic excitation and propa­
gation. Many of these properties were not foreseen as follow­
ing inevitably from the elementary features originally specified
as imitable. For instance, an inhibitory end-organ can be con­
nected to one end of the chain and an inhibitory synapse
arranged in the middle of it. This is achieved by connecting
the anode of a photo-cell through a capacitor to the positive
side of the first element of the pre-synaptic chain. With this
arrangement, when light falls on the photo-cell its anode be­
comes more negative and transiently decreases the excitability
 of the element to which it is connected. The adaptation rate is
governed by the time-constant of the coupling capacitor and
 resistors. Now, if the post-synaptic stretch is set to discharge at
a moderate rate, and the pre-synaptic stretch at a high rate,
                                                                239


===== PDF PAGE 240 =====

The Living Brain
the activity of the latter will partially inhibit that of the former.
When a light is shone on the photo-cell, the pre-synaptic dis­
charge will be inhibited, but in consequence the post-synaptic
activity will be ^-charged. Further, if in identical conditions
the photo-cell is illuminated by a flickering light, at a moderate
rate of flicker, inhibition at the end-organ is converted into
excitation; the system responds with a rebound at the end of
each flash. Accordingly, with flicker, the discharge rate in the
pre-synaptic chain is augmented instead of being reduced by
steady light, and the post-synaptic activity is still further in­
hibited instead of being dis-inhibited.
   Effects such as this are in fact seen in the central nervous
system; a change in stimulus frequency has often been found
to invert the response, and the anomalous effects of flicker have
been described in some detail. It may well be that these other­
wise rather puzzling phenomena may be explicable in terms of
the peculiar properties of rapidly adapting inhibitory synapses,
displayed so clearly in this simple model. The fact that this
model is affected by and produces electrical rather than
chemical or mechanical changes should be regarded as a con­
venience and a coincidence. It is not, of course, proof that the
electrical changes in nerve are the essence of nervous action.
The model is simply the analogue of one set of familiar mathe­
matical expressions relating to passive networks linked by a
non-linear operator in the form of a discharge tube. It could
quite well be formed of chemical or mechanical parts and does
not in theory contain more information than do the algebraic
equations. Its advantage is that, being a real object, it has
constant dimensions; hence its predictions are more explicit
 and detailed than those of the equations in which the constants
 are rather more arbitrary and independent.


===== PDF PAGE 241 =====

      APPENDIX B

The Design of M. Speculatrix

As already emphasized, the simpler a model is, the more help­
ful it is likely to be. This is a model of elementary reflex be­
haviour and contains only two functional elements: two re­
ceptors, two nerve cells, two effectors. The first receptor is a
photo-electric cell, mounted on the spindle of the steering
column so that it always faces in the same direction as the
single front driving wheel, which is one effector. In the dark
the steering is continuously rotated by the steering motor, the
other effector, so that the photo-cell scans steadily. The scan­
ning rotation is stopped when moderate light enters the photo­
cell, but starts again at half speed when the light intensity is
greater - the dazzle state. The driving motor operates at half
speed when scanning in the dark, at full speed in moderate or
intense light. The other receptor is a ring-and-stick limit switch
attached to the shell, which is rubber-suspended. When the shell
touches something or when a gradient is encountered, it is
displaced and closes the limit switch. This connects the output
of the ‘central nervous’ amplifier back to its input through a
capacitor so that it is turned into a multivibrator. The oscilla­
tions produced by the multivibrator stop the circuit from acting
as an amplifier so that simple sensitivity to light is lost; instead,
the connexions alternate between the ‘dark’ and ‘dazzle’ states.
The steering-scanning motor is alternately on full- and half­
power and the driving motor at the same time on half- and
full-power. The effect of this is to produce a turn-and-push
manoeuvre. The time-constant of the feedback circuit is
selected to give about one-third of the time on ‘steer-hard-push-
gently’ and two-thirds ‘push-hard-steer gently’. This seems to
give a prompt response to the first contact with an obstacle, a
reasonable chance of getting away, or getting through a gap -
                                                                 241


===== PDF PAGE 242 =====

The Living Brain
and a short after-discharge to ensure final escape. Though there
is no direct attraction to light in the obstacle-avoiding state, the
feedback time-constant is shorter when the photo-cell is illumin­
ated, so that when an obstacle is met in the dark the avoidance
drill is done in a leisurely fashion, but when there is an attrac­
tive light nearby the movements are more hasty.
   The electrical circuit is shown in Figure 19. This is only one
of many possible arrangements, but is probably the simplest




in components and wiring. The photo-cell is a gas-filled type,
and generally needs no optical system, a single light-louvre
giving sufficient directionality. It is convenient to connect the
tube between the grid of the first amplifier tube and the negative
side of the 6-volt accumulator needed to run the motors. This
gives sufficient sensitivity for an ordinary flashlamp to control
the device, and avoids overdriving the miniature tubes; but
other connexions are possible, particularly if other types of
amplifiers are used. The grid of the input tube is connected to
the positive side of the 6-volt battery through a 10 meg. resistor;
illumination of the photo-cell can therefore only change the
bias on the input tube from zero to about 4 v. negative. In the
dark the first tube, having zero bias, passes its full current, and
242


===== PDF PAGE 243 =====

                                                       A ppendix
the relay in its anode is ‘on’. This tube is a triode or a triode-
connected pentode. The relay should have a resistance of about
10,000 ohms, or rather less than the anode impedance of the
tube, and a single pole change-over contact. The resistance of
this relay and the anode impedance of the first tube form a
potentiometer which fixes the screen voltage of the second tube.
The anode of the first tube is thus connected directly to the
screen of the second and also through a 0-5 mf capacitor to its
grid. This provides a relatively high gain for changes in illumin­
ation and steady-state amplification when the input is larger.
Living systems commonly differentiate or ‘adapt’ to moderate
changes in stimulus strength but respond steadily to intense
stimuli. The effect of this coupling is to permit transient inter­
ruption of the scanning motion when a faint light enters the
photo-cell, thus gradually bringing the model on to the beam at
a distance, then a steady inhibition of scanning when the light
is brighter or nearer. The relay in the anode of the second tube
is of the same type as the first, but the moving contact goes
straight to the positive terminal of the 6-volt battery instead of
through the pilot light. The stationary contacts are connected
in the same way, ‘on’ to the driving motor, ‘off’ to the scanning
motor, in both relays; in faint light, relay two is closed moment­
arily; in moderate light it is held closed; and in bright light it
remains closed but relay one opens, thus providing for swerving
away from a bright light.
   The pilot light, which is in series with the moving contact of
 relay one, is short-circuited when relay two closes, and is there­
fore extinguished when the driving motor is turned to full
power and the scanning movement is arrested by light. When
the light from the pilot bulb is reflected from a mirror into the
photo-cell, it is turned off, but the disappearance of this light
restores relay two to ‘off’ and the light appears again. This
 provides the self- and mutual-recognition modes. Several cir­
 cuit variations are possible; the effect of light can be reversed
by inverting the photo-cell connexions, and the relays may at
the same time, or independently, be reversed also. The photo­
cell may be positioned to face in the opposite direction from
the movement, and so forth.
                                                               243


===== PDF PAGE 244 =====

The Living Brain
   The mechanical design is usually more of a problem than the
electrical. Remembering that all power must be carried, a clear
optimum exists for battery capacity, chassis dimensions, motor
power, and the like. There is not a great choice of motors;
those used for driving small home-constructed models are
adequate but not efficient owing to their disproportionate fric­
tional losses. It is often advisable to re-bush the bearings of
these motors with a self-lubricating bearing. The gear trains to
the driving and scanning shafts are the most awkward parts for
an amateur constructor. The first model of this species was
furnished with pinions from old clocks and gas-meters. The
ratio should be about 100:1 for the driving and 180:1 for the
steering mechanism, and is best obtained with simple single
pinions, since small worm reduction-gears are wasteful and
liable to seize when forced backwards, as happens sometimes
when the model is in difficulties.
   The weight-distribution is critical, since the front wheel is
turning almost continually through 360° even when there is no
forward motion. The forward weight should be only just
enough to ensure an adequate grip for the front tyre, and the
centre of gravity should be just forward of the line joining the
rear wheels. The front tyre should be rubber, but thin and fairly
hard, so that it can turn easily. The rear tyres should be softer
and larger. The wheelbase determines the turning circle and
should be about six inches, the rear track being about seven
inches. Since the motion of the model is a combination of linear
and circular displacements, its gait is cycloidal, and once it has
lost a target, a complete rotation of the steering scanning shaft
may be necessary to pick it up again. The continuous rotation
may be replaced with a reciprocating system using a wind­
screen-wiper motor geared up to 2:1 to give 360° sweep; but
this also has disadvantages. The model may be made into a
better ‘self-directing missile’ by using two photo-cells in the
usual way, but it will be a worse ‘animal’, for though it will
keep more closely to its beam it will have to be aimed roughly
in the right direction and will not ‘speculate’ - that is, spy out
the land - nor will it solve Buridan’s dilemma.


===== PDF PAGE 245 =====

      APPENDIX C


A Conditioned Reflex Analogue

This circuit in Figure 20 seems to be the simplest to display the
necessary properties. It was worked out to fit on to M. specula-
trix, but it is difficult to adjust on a moving model and should be
set up on the bench first.
   There are four tubes; the first, a sharp cut-off pentode, mixes
and integrates the specific and neutral signals; the second, a
miniature neon-tube, strikes when the voltage across the con­
denser in the anode of the first tube reaches its threshold; the
third receives a transient from the neon-tube and maintains a
damped oscillation in the phase-shifting network; the fourth is
a gating heptode which receives signals both from the oscillat­
ing circuit of the third tube and from the source of neutral
signals, conducting only when both are present.
   The values of the components depend on the range of res­
ponses desired. The time-constant of the high-pass network Cl
R, determines the differentiation of the specific stimulus
applied to the grid of the pentode, which is biased back to cut
off through R,. The low-pass network C2 R2 controls the rate
of rise and extension of the neutral signal reaching the pentode
screen, which is at cut-off voltage until a signal appears.
   The first tube should not conduct unless both grid and screen
receive positive signals and the screen signal precedes or coin­
cides with the grid signal. If the grid signal is more than about
0-1 sec. before the screen one, the grid will have returned to
cut-off level before the screen becomes positive. The bias con­
ditions and time-constants must be so adjusted that the tube
conducts only when the two sets of signals have these relations.
The value of the capacitor C3 determines the time-constant of
long-term integration by which is computed the overall time-
                                                               245


===== PDF PAGE 246 =====

The Living Brain
                                  (a)




      SCANNING     NOVI MG TO       TOKSZING TO    SOUND MEANS LIGHT
                   LIGHT            SOUND          HUXZMG INHIBITED



                  Figure 20. Circuits of M. Docilis
(а) Functional circuit. The numbers one to seven refer to the operations
    performed by each element as detailed in Chapter 7, and correspond
    with those in Figure 12.
(б) Conditioned Reflex Analogue. Circuit details of Conditioned Reflex
    Analogue as demonstration model.

246


===== PDF PAGE 247 =====

                                                      A ppendix
                               (b)




area of coincidence between successive appearances of neutral
and specific signals.
   At each combination of the two signals in the effective time-
order, the voltage across C3 rises by an amount dependent on
the degree of overlap between the differentiated specific and
extended neutral signals. In the period between signals - which
may be relatively very long - the voltage tends to fall slowly as
the capacitor discharges. Stray and internal leakage resistances
are usually adequate to ensure that some discharge occurs,
equivalent to the gradual lapsing of unconscious memory of a
coincidence. A leakage resistance of 1000 megohms per micro­
farad will give a constant of 1000 seconds - that is, about
twenty minutes - by which time the voltage will fall to thirty-
seven per cent of its original value. This is appropriate and
compares roughly with the time-constant of decay in some
animals; with a good modern capacitor the decay time may be
ten times as long.
   The rising voltage across C3 is applied continuously to the
neon-tube, which strikes at some voltage between fifty and
sixty-five volts. (The tube may be visible from outside and
labelled ‘Insight’.) In consequence the capacitor is discharged
to about forty volts, thus retaining a trace of the previous ex­
perience; and the discharge current, passing through R3 pro­
vides a transient voltage through R4 and C4 to the grid of the
pentode, which is also of the sharp cut-off type. Between the
                                                             247


===== PDF PAGE 248 =====

The Living Brain
anode and grid of this pentode is connected a 3-stage high-pass
network - C5, R5, CR, R6, C7, R7 - providing a phase shift of
 180° at some convenient frequency.
   The amount of feedback in this circuit is controlled by the
potentiometer R7. (The point of zero feedback may be labelled
‘Amnesia’.) The amount of feedback determines the Q and
decay time of this circuit. When the gain of the tube is about
thirty, spontaneous oscillation will build up, and the control
should be set so that the circuit is just quiescent, with a long
die-away. The value of the anode resistor R8 and the screen
voltage of this tube must be adjusted carefully so that the
working conditions are optimal, in order to obtain the longest
possible decay time compatible with stability. (The anode re­
sistor may be variable and used as a fine-control of Q, or
‘Reminiscence’.)
   The time, T, to decay to 1 /e of the original amplitude is given
approximately by Q/rf; this means that the lower the fre­
quency the longer the decay time can be for a given Q and
stability. With careful adjustment, a Q of several thousand can
be attained, so that at one c/s a decay time of ten or fifteen
minutes can be expected, and the rate of decline after the 1 /e
time is of course slower and slower.
   A milliammeter in the anode circuit indicates the presence of
a ‘memory’. This meter can be labelled ‘Reminiscence’.
   The declining oscillatory signal from this circuit is applied to
the signal grid, G3, of the heptode tube through the resistor Re,
this electrode being biased to cut off through R5. The first grid
of this tube is connected through C8 to the source of the neutral
signals, and, when driven positive at the same time as the oscil­
latory signals are driving G3 positive, the tube conducts and
operates the relay in its anode. This relay is arranged to perform
whatever function was associated with the generation of the
specific signal.
  The choice of tubes and values in the original cor a was
limited to those which could be obtained in battery miniature
tube types. A mains-operated demonstration model is very
much easier to set up and maintain. For instance, an unby­
passed cathode resistor of about 300 ohms in the resonating
248


===== PDF PAGE 249 =====

                                                      A ppendix
pentode circuit provides negative feedback which makes the
system more stable at very high Q values. The final mixing gate
can be a double triode, but the heptode arrangement ensures
that if and when the neutral signal arrives at the gate tube, and
drives G, positive, this tube provides an additional resistance
in parallel with R3 and tends slightly to damp the oscillation in
the preservation circuit - that is, the conditioned ‘memory’ is
attenuated by persistent repetition of the neutral signal alone.
The effect of the neutral signal, after conditioning is estab­
lished, is only transient owing to the decay of voltage across
Cs. This temporary extinction does not prevent the reappear­
ance of the conditioned response when another trial is made
after a few moments.
   The very high Q of the resonating circuit makes the system
extremely sensitive to small rhythmic transients repeated at the
frequency to which the circuit is tuned. This means that
rhythmic operations, such as applying the specific or neutral
signals at the frequency of the tuned circuit, may establish or
evoke an irrelevant ‘memory’ if they change the voltage of any
of the supply circuits by as little as one part in a thousand. The
supplies must therefore be obtained from either the low-resist­
ance batteries or a well-stabilized power-pack. Separate sup­
plies for the resonator are easy to arrange and give least trouble.
   When the model is designed simply as a bench demonstration,
operation of the keys providing the neutral and specific signals
can be arranged to illuminate suitable signs to indicate the
conditions being imitated; if it is desired to attach the circuit to
a mobile model such as M. speculatrix, the appropriate con­
nexions are as indicated. The chief difficulty here is ensuring
adequate homeostasis; when the driving motors are heavily
loaded they lower the voltage of the battery and disturb the
equanimity of the learning circuit. It is usually necessary to
contrive a ‘circle of Willis’ - that is, a separate heater battery -
in order to maintain constant supplies in spite of the demands -
of the motors. This feature, and the sensitivity to rhythmic
stimuli, would be serious faults in a tool-machine but are
virtues in a lifelike toy, for they exist in animals.
   When a defensive reflex is arranged, the connexions are as
                                                              249


===== PDF PAGE 250 =====

The Living Brain
shown dotted; and the inhibitory links necessary to suppress a
reflex incompatible with the conditioned response are also
shown in the diagram of the relay connexions.
  The sound amplifier is self-explanatory; sharp tuning is
necessary to avoid undue sensibility to random noises.
   An instructive application of the circuit as a demonstration
model is to make all important controls adjustable and cali­
brated in appropriate units, and to induce a few students to set
them all so that the behaviour of the model is as sensible as they
think that of a good animal should be. The settings decided
upon illuminate both the theory of learning and the tempera­
ments of the learners.




A Short Bibliography

Adrian, E. D. The Physical Background of Perception. Oxford
  (University Press), 1947.
Ashby, W. R. Design for a Brain. London (Chapman & Hall), 1952.
Barcroft, J. Features in the Architecture of Physiological Func­
  tion. London (Cambridge University Press), 1934.
Bonin, G. von. Essay on the Cerebral Cortex. Springfield
  (Thomas), 1950.
Brazier, M. A. B. The Electrical Activity of the Nervous System.
  London (Pitman), 1951.
 Bibliography of Electroencephalography, 1875-1948, Montreal,
 (International Federation of eeg Societies), 1950.
Cannon, W. B. The Wisdom of the Body. London, 1932.
Craik, K. J. W. The Nature of Explanation. London (Cambridge
 University Press), 1943.
Fry, Margery. Arms of the Law. London (Gollancz), 1951.
Gibbs, F. A. and E. L. Atlas of Electroencephalography. Cam­
 bridge, Mass (Addison-Wesley), 1950.
Hebb, D. O. The Organization of Behavior. New York (Wiley),
  1949.
Hill, J. D. N. and Parr, G., editors. Electroencephalography.
 London (Macdonald), 1950.
250


===== PDF PAGE 251 =====

                                           A Short Bibliography
Hubbard, R. L. Dianetics, The Modern Science of Menial Health
  London (Derrick Ridgway), 1951.
Jeffress, L. A., editor. Cerebral Mechanisms in Behavior. New
  York (Wiley). London (Chapman & Hall), 1951.
  The Hixon Symposium, consisting of seven contributions by
  authorities on mathematics, psychiatry, psychology, and physio­
  logy.
Latil, P. de. La Pensce artificielle. Paris (Gallimard), 1952.
Lorenz, K. King Solomon's Ring. London (Methuen), 1952.
Olmsted, J. M. D. Claude Bernard, Physiologist. London
  (Cassell), 1939.
Penfield, W. and Rasmussen, T. The Cerebral Cortex of
  Man. New York (Macmillan), 1950.
Pincher, C. Evolution. Reason Why Series. London (Herbert
  Jenkins), 1950.
Richter, D., editor. Perspective in Neuropsychiatry. London
  (H. K. Lewis), 1950.
Schwab, R. Electroencephalography in Clinical Practice. Phila­
  delphia, London (W. B. Saunders), 1951).
Sherrington, C. S. The Integrative Action of the Nervous Sys­
  tem. Cambridge (University Press), 1905, 1947.
  Man on his Nature. Cambridge (University Press), 1940, 1951.
Whyte, L. L., editor. Aspects of Form. London (Lund Humphries),
   1951.
Wiener, N. Cybernetics. New York (Wiley). London {Chapman
  & Hall). Paris (Hermann), 1948.
  The Human Use of Human Beings. Boston (Houghton Mifflin),
   1950.
Young, J. Z. Doubt and Certainty in Science. Oxford (Clarendon
  Press). 1951.
Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology. An Inter­
national Journal, published quarterly in Montreal for the Inter­
national Federation of Societies for Electroencephalography and
Clinical Neurophysiology.


===== PDF PAGE 252 =====

                                 Index
Abstraction, 165, 218                  Biedermann, W., 51
Acetylcholine, 50                      Biology, 29, 68
Adaptation, 33, 35-6, 38, 55, 148,     Birth, 122, 173
  230                                  ‘Black Box’, circuit, 246-8; en­
Adler, A., 223                           gineer’s, 142; learning box, 147-
Adrian, E. D., 55-6, 58, 72, 80          8; teacher’s, 223-4
Age, rhythms correlation, 38; old      Boole, J., 109-10
  age, 193-4                           Brain, artificial, 106-7; bird and
Algebra, Boolean, 109-10; need of,       reptile, 38; communal, 27
  61, 69-70. 233                         cortex, 71; dying, 194; eman
Alpha rhythms, demonstration of,         cipation, 41; evolution of, 34
  56; discovery of, 54; distribu­        growth, 173-4; imagination, 25
  tion of, 188; in lovers’ quarrels,     185; interconnexion theory, 107
  189-90; politicians’ and diplo­        pelvic, 39; regeneration, 197-8
  mats’, 190—1; test of types, 185—      size, 106, 230; and survival, 25
  6; in twins, 188-9; types,             37; vagrancy of function, 71
  P.R.M., 184 ff.                        versatility, 193, 227-8
Alphoid rhythms, 191                   Brainprints, see Rhythms
Amoeba, 28, 29                         ‘Brainwaves’, 214-15
Ampfere, 33                            Bremer, F., 162
Amphibia, 38, 125, 207-8               British Association, 51
Amplification, 26, 56, 84-5            Bronowski, J., 233
Anatomy, 46-7, 72                      Browning, E. B., 171
Animal training, 142-3, 146            Burden Neurological Institute, 59,
Apes, 26, 42, 92, 148                    63, 197
Aristotle, 26                          Buridan’s Ass, 115
Armaments, 40
Artist, 68, 104                        Cambrian, 35
Ashby, W. R., 111-12                   Cambridge school, 53-5
Association theory, 48                 Camera, 63, 75-6
Augustine, St, 178                     Carbon dioxide, 194
Average analysis, 59, 192-3, 228       Carboniferous, 38, 208
                                       Carpenter, E., 39
Babbage, C., 109-10                    Carroll, Lewis, 45,110
Baby, 122, 173^4                       Caton, R., 51
Balance, 129                           Causality, 221
Baltic mentality, 67                   Cavendish, H. L., 48
Barcroft, Sir J., 41, 54               Cell, amoeba, 29; into nerve, 33;
Beecher, H. W„ 200                       plant, 31
Behaviourism, 54, 120-1, 223           Cells, mechanisms of, 29, 59;
Berger, Hans, 54-6, 63 , 69, 80, 85,     nerve, 29, 32-3; plant, 30-1
  96                                   Central Pathological Laboratory,
Bergson, H., 69                          55,81
Berkeley, E. C., 118                   Cerebrum, 80
Bernard, Claude, 41, 69, 119           Chance, 139 ff.
252


===== PDF PAGE 253 =====

                                                                   Index
Chaos, 34, 68-9                        Electric shock therapy, 196-7
Children, backward, 223-5; delin­      Electricity, 48 ff.
  quent, 181-2                         Electrobiology (as ‘Sorcery’), 104-
Christian ethic, 224                     5, 118
Christian Science, 104, 223            Electrocardiography, 51
Cold, 208                              Electrochemistry, 29, 49, 164, 168
Comfort, 44                            Electroencephalography {see
Common sense, as statistic, 152          Rhythms, Berger, Toposcope);
Communications problems, 34, 78,         societies, 63-4; symposium, 93
  106, 161, 225                        Electronics, 68
Computers, 109-10                      Electrophysiology, 49
Conditioned reflex, 53, 80,133, 143,   Electroretinogram, 98-9
  145-6, 162, 169                      Eliot, T. S., 80
CORA, 156 ff. (Conditioned Re­         Emergency mechanisms, 167
  flex Analogue); circuits, 246-7      Emotion, 46, 167, 176-7, 183
Cortex, 72 ff.                         Epilepsy, 58, 87 ff.
Craik, K., 112                         Evans, C., 202
Crawshay-Williams, R., 219             Evans, Margiad, 93-4
Cryptogram, eeg as, 136-7              Evolution, 25, 31, 114, 229
Cryptograms, modesty of, 31            ‘Ewe-lamb’ hypothesis, 228
Cybernetics, 33, 223                   Extra-sensory phenomena, 33, 214—
                                         15
Dante, 115                             Eyelids, effect of lowering, 201-2
Darwin, 68
de Latil, P., 34                       Faith healing, 211, 223
Death, 194                             Faraday, M., 51
Deity, 222                             Faradization, 51
Delegation, 33, 232                    Fatigue, 211-12
Delinquency, 181, 223, 228             Feedback, metaphysical, 34; phy­
Delta rhythms, in childhood, 175;        siological, 34, 105; steam, 105
  defence mechanism, 208-9; in         Ferrier, D., 51-2
  delinquents, 181-2; discovery of,    Fingerprints, 172-3
  82; functions of, 209; prenatal,     Fire, 42^*
  173; in sleep, 205-6; tumour         Fish, 36-7, 209
  location, 58, 224                    Flicker, circumventory protective
Descartes, 47                            mechanism, 201; epilepsy, 87-8;
Devonian, 38                             feedback control, 99-100; hal­
Dianetics, 223                           lucinations, 93 ff.; public inci­
Dinosaurs, 39, 125                       dents, 91; secondary responses,
Dispersion of signal in brain, 86-7,     166-7; technique, 86 ff.
  95-6, 167                            Flowers, 30-1
Doncaster, L., 29                      Forgetting, 111
Dreams, 205-6                          Fourier, J. B. J., 83
Dubois-Reymond, E., 51                 Frankenstein, 106
Ductility, 182, 226                    Freud. S., 73, 121, 178,210, 225
                                       Fritsch, 51
Eddington, Sir A., 219, 231            Fry, Margery, 228
Edelmann, 56
Education, 222 ff.                     Galileo, 47
eeo, see Rhythms                       Galvani, L., 47-52
Effectors, 70, 167                     Galvanic current, 51
Einstein, A., 47                       Galvanometer, 51
                                                                     253


===== PDF PAGE 254 =====

Index
Gambling, 151-2                        Insects, 27, 38
Ganglion, 27-8                         Instinct, 121—2
Gantt, H., 130                         Intelligence, 225
Gastaut, H., 88
Genetics, 31-2, 129, 228               James, W., 46
Genius, 192-3, 228                     Jaquet-Droz, 162
Gestalt, 120                           Jasper, H. H., 88
Gibbs, E. L., 207                      Jellyfish, 27-8, 34, 90, 173
Gibbs, F. A., 207                      Jung, R., 225
Gilbert, W., 48
Goethe, 104,216, 218                   K-complex, 205-6
Golden Age, 226                        Kohler, W., 120
Golla, F. L., 55, 58, 81               Kremlin, 196
Greeks, 45-6
Gresham’s Law, 232                     Lange, 46
Growth, 173                            Learning, 119 ff.; animal training,
Growth at nerve endings, 161-2           146; by association (q.v.); in
Gutenberg, 234                           epilepsy, 92; by imprinting, 121-
                                         2; in mental disorder, 194;
Haldane, J. B. S., 29                    origin of, 124-5; play, 125; by
Hallucinations, 72, 93, 195, 212         repetition, 123; ‘trial and error’,
Hand, 38, 207                            123-5
Hartley, D., 47-8, 54, 162             Learning by association, seven
Hebb, D O., 179                          operations; 1. differentiation,
High altitudes, 194, 208                 149; 2. extension, 149; 3. mix­
Hill, D., 178                            ing, 151; 4. summation, 151-2;
Hippocrates, 128                         5. activation, 154; 6. preserva­
Hitzig, 54                               tion, 154; 7. combination, 154
Hobbes, T., 47, 119                    Lennox, W. G., 228
Hodge, R. S., 191                      Leucotomy, 195; neolithic method,
Holism, 71, 220                          196
Home Guard, 34                         Libraries, 233-4
Homeostasis, 41, 44, 208, 218-19       Liddell, E. G. T., 130
Homcostat, see Models                  Livanov, M. N., 140
Homo sapiens, 25 ; distinction, 26;    Loomis, A. L., 203
  future of, 230; relations, 42;       Lorenz, K., 121
  single species, 229-30
Homogeneity, 135-6                     McCulloch, W. S., 222
Horse, 42                              Machina docilis, see Models
Hoyle, F., 236                         Machina speculatrix, see Models
Hubbard, R. L., 223                    Mackay, D. M., 233
Hume, D., 48                           Magic, 25, 61-2, 104, 112
Huxley, J., 29                         Maida Vale Hospital, 81
Hypnosis, 213-14                       Maladies, protective, 90
Hysteria, 210-11                       Mammals, 42
                                       Marcus Aurelius, 25, 139
Ideas, 165, 221                        Masefield, J., 65
Illusions, 90                          Masserman, 159-60
Images, flicker, 96 ff.; sacred, 105   Mathematics, 233
Imagination, 25-6, 220                 Matthews, B. H. C., 55-6, 80
Imprinting, learning by, 121-2;        Maudsley Hospital, 55
   mechanism, 122                      Maxwell, J. Clerk, 68, 105
254


===== PDF PAGE 255 =====

                                                                    Index
Meaning, 126, 221                      Oscillation, 48, 58, 162
Mechanism, doctrine of, 48             Oxford school, 53
Memory, 67-8, 111, 154, 233;           Oxygen, 173, 194
 localized, 164; stimulation, 164;
 types of, 161-2                       Paranoia, 194
Mencken, H. L., 226                    Parsimony, 32, 37, 113
Mendel, 68, 129, 224                   Pattern, 67 ff.; making, 68; seek­
Mental disorders, 191,194 ff.            ing, 68, 218
Mental events, 65                      Pavlov, J. P., 51, 53-4, 127 ff., 133,
Mentality, 47, 65,172, 199, 220           144, 169, 223
Mesmcr, Dr, 50                         Penfield, W., 89, 164
Metaphysics, 34, 219                   Permian, 125
Milton, J., 86                         Personality, 171 ff., 217
Mimicry of life, 104 ff.; principles   Philosophy, 66
 of, 113; purpose of, 104              Phrenology, 45
Mind, see Mentality; and matter,       Phylactic theory, 209
 214; as entity, 220                   Physiological Society, 55
Missing links, amphibia, 38; be­       Physiology, 52, 69-70
 tween orders, 35                      Piaget, J., 221
Mobility. 32-3                         Pitts, W., 233
Models. M. docilis (CORA), 118,        Plants, 29-30
 156 ff. (circuits, App. C.); M.       Play. 37, 40, 125
 labyrinthea, 111, 125, 164; M.        Poliakov, K. L., 140
 sopora (Homeostat), 111-12; M.        Pope, A., 67
 speculatrix (Tortoise), 113 ff..      Prawdwicz-Neminski, W. W., 52
 125 (circuit, App. B.); M. specu­     Priest, 61-2, 104
 latrix berkeleyi. 118 (nerve, 106;    Propaganda in brain responses,
 circuit, App. A.)                        166-7
Moniz, E., 195                         Protoplasm, 29
Monkeys, 26                            Psychiatry, 159-60, 177-8, 194,
Montessori, M., 188                      218-19, 221-2
Movement, 69                           Psychology, 120, 172
Mundy-Castle, A. C., 229               Psychosomatic illness, 132, 210-11
Music, 75                              Psychosurgery, 219
Mutation, 32, 38, 229
                                       Quakers, 104
Narcissism, mechanical, 115
Nerve, artificial, 106; impulse, 50;   Race, 229
  nerve cell, 32; tendrils, 53         Rashevsky, N., 233
Nerve-junctions, 165-6                 Receptors, 70
Nerve-net, 27-8                        Redundancy, 62
Nervous system, functions of, 62       Regeneration, 197
Neurosis, in cats and machines, 160    Reptiles, 39-41, 208
Newton, I., 47-8, 68                   Retina, 76, 94
Nirvana, 44                            Rhythm, sense of, 75
Novelty, importance of, 92, 168        Rhythms, 55, 61, 80, 87, 92, 164,
Nurture and nature, 228                  207, 209, 216-17, 231; in dreams,
                                         205; K-complexes, 205-7, 209-
Occam's razor, 118                       10; main rhythms, 84-5; spindle-
Octopus, 27                              waves, 210
Organic design, principles of, 113     Roget’s Thesaurus, 104
Orwell, G., 127-8                      Romance languages, 68
                                                                         255


===== PDF PAGE 256 =====

Index
Rosenthal, J. S., 54, 129              Survival, 25, 148, 230
Ross, T., 110                          Sweat, 42
Russell, B., 222
Rutherford, Sir E., 47                 Technique, 56, 59, 83
                                       Telepathy, 33, 214
Safety, factor of, 161                 Television, 99, 226
Scanning, ocular, 77; theory of,       Temper, 178; control of, 182
  99-103                               Temperature, body, 41
Schizophrenia, 45, 194                 Theosophy, 223
Schwab, R. S., 211                     Thermionic valve, 52
Sea, 34, 37, 207-8                     Thermostasis, 26, 41
Secondary responses, 169               Theta rhytms, 81, 85; in children,
Self-awareness (in machine), 115         176 fL; control of, 183; dis­
Semites, 104                             covery of, 176; evocation of,
Sensory systems, 70; hearing, 74;        179; frustration pattern, 180;
  pain, 74; smell, 72; taste, 71-2;      in psychopaths, 177
  touch, 73-4; vision, 75-8, 95        Thinking and survival, 25, 148
Sex, 30-1,40, 73                       Thompson, S., 48
Shakespeare, W., 46                    Thorndyke, 120
Shannon, Claude, 111, 233              Toposcope, 63, 101, 134, 137, 168
Shaw, G. B., 129                       ‘Tortoise’, see Models
Shelley, Mary, 106                     Transcendentalism, 215-16
Sherrington, Sir C., 53, 63, 86        Trigger, biological, 29; feedback
Shipton, Harold, 63                      device, 101
Shivering, 27                          Tumours, location of, 58
Signals, 135-6                         Twins, 172, 188-9
Silurian, 36                           Types, 128-9, 185, 224
Sleep, brain rhythms, 202 ff.; func­
  tion, 208-9; needs, 210; origin      Universe, 231
  of, 41, 207-8
Smoke-ring, 50                         Vagrancy of function, 71
Social organization in machines,       Vatican, 196
   116                                 Versatility, 193, 226-8
Social service, brain physiology,      ‘Vibratiuncles’, 48, 54, 162
   172, 181, 231                       Vivisection, 52
Soviet physiology, 52-4                Volta, 48-9
Spinoza, 222                           Wallace, R. A., Ill
Spitz, 12?                             Watt, J., 105
Sponge, 33                             Weaver, W., 233
Stalin, J., 52                         Wertheimer, 120
Stapledon, O., 27                      Wiener, N., 33, 117, 126, 220, 232
Statistics, 151
Stimulation, see Flicker               Yoga, 44, 131-2, 169, 213, 223
Stroboscope, 87
Surgery, 164, 195-7                    Zoology, 26


===== PDF PAGE 257 =====

        Freud and the Post-Freudians

                 j. a. c. BROWN
                         A 522


Freud and the Post-Freudians explains the main con­
cepts of Freudian psychology and goes on to review
the theories of Adler, Jung, Rank, and Stekel. Later
developments in the orthodox Freudian school are
also discussed, as are those of the American Neo-
Freudians and Post-Freudians in England.
   This is the first book published in Britain to bring
together all these psychological and sociological
schools and criticize them, from both the Freudian
standpoint and that of the scientific psychologists.
   Dr J. A. C. Brown, who was at one time Deputy
Director of the Institute of Social Psychiatry in
London, is an expert on industrial psychology and his
book. The Social Psychology of Industry, is also a
Pelican (A 296).


===== PDF PAGE 258 =====

This Is a pioneer work of great Importance-the
first attempt to record for the general public
the tremendous advances of the last twenty
years in our knowledge of the mechanics
of the brain. These advances have largely been
made possible by the electroencephalograph
(EEG for short), which picks up and magnifies
electric impulses in the brain


The author describes the rhythmic patterns of
different personalities as seen on 'brain prints'
and discusses how the EEG can help us to
understand memory, vision, fatigue, sleep,
hypnotism, genius, lunacy, sex disturbance,
crime, disease and other normal and abnormal
phenomena


•The most entertaining and the most generally
instructive book that has appeared on the
electronics of brain actions . . . enlivened with
humour and literary quotations' —
Sir Geoffrey Jefferson in the Guardian


'Dr Grey Walter's remarkable book gives the
reader an exciting feeling of standing on a
frontier of research' - Observer



For copyright reasons th/s edition is not for
sale in the U.S.A




Published by Penguin Books


