===== PDF PAGE 001 =====



===== PDF PAGE 002 =====

Cybernetics


===== PDF PAGE 003 =====



===== PDF PAGE 004 =====

Cybernetics


or Control and Communication in the Animal and the Machine




Norbert Wiener



forewords by Doug Hill and Sanjoy K. Mitter




The MIT Press
Cambridge, Massachusetts
London, England


===== PDF PAGE 005 =====

© 2019, 1961, 1948 Massachusetts Institute of Technology


First MIT Press paperback edition, February 1965


All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any
form by any electronic or mechanical means (including photocopying,
recording, or information storage and retrieval) without permission in
writing from the publisher.


This book was set in ITC Stone Serif Std and ITC Stone Sans Std by Top-
pan Best-set Premedia Limited. Printed and bound in the United States
of America.


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data


Names: Wiener, Norbert, 1894-1964, author.
Title: Cybernetics ; or, Control and communication in the animal
  and the machine / Norbert Wiener ; forewords by Doug Hill and
  Sanjoy Mitter.
Other titles: Control and communication in the animal and the
  machine
Description: [Second edition, 2019 reissue]. | Cambridge, MA :
  The MIT Press, [2019] | “Reissue of the 1961 second edition.” |
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
Identifiers: LCCN 2019005612 | ISBN 9780262537841 (pbk. : alk.
  paper)
Subjects: LCSH: Cybernetics. | Control theory. | System theory.
Classification: LCC Q310 .W47 2019 | DDC 003/.5--dc23 LC record
  available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2019005612


10   9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1


===== PDF PAGE 006 =====

To Arturo Rosenblueth
for many years my companion in science


===== PDF PAGE 007 =====



===== PDF PAGE 008 =====

Contents




    Foreword    ix
    Doug Hill

    Foreword    xxi
    Sanjoy K. Mitter

    Preface to the Second Edition    xxxv


Part I.    Original Edition (1948)    1

           Introduction    3
    I.     Newtonian and Bergsonian Time    43
    II.    Groups and Statistical Mechanics    65
    III.   Time Series, Information, and
           Communication    85
    IV.    Feedback and Oscillation    129
    V.     Computing Machines and the Nervous
           System    159
    VI.    Gestalt and Universals    183
    VII.   Cybernetics and Psychopathology    199
    VIII. Information, Language, and Society    215


===== PDF PAGE 009 =====

viii                                                     Contents



Part II.     Supplementary Chapters (1961)    231

       IX.   On Learning and Self-­Reproducing
             Machines    233
       X.    Brain Waves and Self-­Organizing Systems    251


       Notes    281
       Index    293


===== PDF PAGE 010 =====

Foreword


Doug Hill




It tells you something about Norbert Wiener’s qualifications as
a prophet that Cybernetics has been republished twice since it
first appeared in 1948, and that on each of those occasions his
thoughts and predictions about the technologies he helped cre-
ate have seemed more ingenious, more prescient, and, in some
respects, more troubling.
  The New York Times acknowledged as much in 1965 when it
turned over the front page of its prestigious book review section
to Cybernetics’ first reissue—­a rare editorial honor indeed for a
book that was, at the time, seventeen years old.1 (The decision to
grant cover status may have been influenced by the fact that a
month earlier Wiener had won, posthumously, a National Book
Award for God & Golem, Inc.) The Times’ reviewer, John Pfeiffer,
called Cybernetics “one of the finest intellectual adventure sto-
ries ever written.” He also noted, however, that upon the book’s
initial publication, Wiener’s warnings about the potential dan-
gers of computer technology had created “something of a scan-
dal.” Three years after Hiroshima and Nagasaki, Americans were
worried that scientists might not be able to contain the powers
they’d unleashed. Wiener didn’t reassure them.


===== PDF PAGE 011 =====

x                                                          Foreword



    His introduction concludes by noting his distress that those
who contributed to the development of cybernetics, including
himself, “stand in a moral position which is, to say the least, not
very comfortable.” The techniques emerging from their ideas, he
said, could be used for evil as well as good, and it was obvious
he expected they would be. True, he said, many of his colleagues
held out hope that cybernetics could lead to “a better under-
standing of man and society.” Speaking for himself, Wiener said,
“I am compelled to say that it is a very slight hope.”
    This latest reissue of Cybernetics likewise makes its appearance
at a time when people are wondering whether we have our tech-
nologies firmly in control. And it’s safe to say Wiener would not
be surprised that those anxieties arise from just the sorts of tech-
nological power he wrote about in 1948.
    The likely impact of automation on employment is an exam-
ple. Over the past few years, a plethora of articles, books, studies,
and conferences have warned, often alarmingly, that advances
in artificial intelligence and robotics pose a significant threat to
a significant number of jobs. Some of these postulate that half or
more of all jobs could soon be replaced. “This will be the fastest
transition humankind has experienced,” said Kai-­Fu Lee, an AI
expert who has held executive positions at Google, Microsoft,
and Apple, “and we’re not ready for it.”2
    Recent reports of thriving employment don’t disprove auto-
mation’s impact; the decisive factor is how many of those jobs
offer meaningful employment at a living wage, especially for
unskilled workers.3 Two MIT economists, Erik Brynjolfsson and
Andrew McAfee, say we’re witnessing the birth of the “Second
Machine Age.” In an interview with the Harvard Business Review,
McAfee noted that digital technologies are doing for human
brainpower what the steam engine and related technologies did


===== PDF PAGE 012 =====

Foreword                                                          xi



for human muscle power during the Industrial Revolution (aka
the First Machine Age).4 If that doesn’t sound familiar, it will
after reading Cybernetics, where Wiener uses exactly the same
comparison. Wiener notes in the book that he’d attempted to
alert the labor unions of the threats posed by automation to their
membership. With a few exceptions, he said, he found union
leadership “totally unprepared to enter into the larger political,
technical, sociological, and economic questions which concern
the very existence of labor.” Today we seem more willing to talk
about those questions. Whether we’re willing to do something
about them is another question.
  The potentially ruinous impact of communication technolo-
gies on democracy is another issue that Wiener anticipated with
uncanny accuracy. The most fundamental conviction of cyber-
netic theory is that it all comes down to messages (i.e., informa-
tion) sent and responded to (i.e., feedback). The functionality of
a machine, organism, or society depends on the quality of those
messages. Faithful exchanges of information allow the machine,
organism, or society to maintain a state of homeostasis. Informa-
tion corrupted by various forms of noise leads to the opposite.
  In Cybernetics, Wiener calls the mass media of his day the sin-
gle greatest anti-­homeostatic influence in modern society. One
wishes that the techno-­utopians of Silicon Valley had heeded
his point that genuine community extends only so far as the
transmission of effective—­meaning homeostatic—­information.
As the scale, scope, and speed of information technologies have
increased, so has the potential for corruption. Certainly Mark
Zuckerberg failed to appreciate that Facebook’s “global com-
munity” of two billion users would inevitably produce count-
less messages that were antithetical to homeostasis, and thus to
genuine community.


===== PDF PAGE 013 =====

xii                                                      Foreword



      That the routine operation of computer technologies can
lead to disaster was a point Wiener stressed repeatedly. Think-
ing machines are relentlessly literal-­
                                      minded, he said. They
mechanically perform the tasks we ask them to, even though
their interpretation of those tasks may be diametrically opposed
to what we had in mind. So it is that Facebook’s algorithms have
posted videos of murders as efficiently as they’ve posted videos
of marriages.
      Speed is another routine feature of automation that Wiener
frequently warned could thwart our intentions. As he put it in
a 1960 essay for Science magazine, “By the very slowness of our
human actions, our effective control of our machines may be
nullified. By the time we are able to react to information con-
veyed by our senses and stop the car we are driving, it may
already have run head-on into a wall.”5 He was using the car
image metaphorically, of course; the fatal accidents involving
Tesla’s and Uber’s automated vehicles were still many decades in
the future. Still, during those decades we’ve become ever more
dependent on any number of complex computer systems that
aren’t as stable as we like to think. The failure of a relay switch
in a power station in Niagara Falls, New York, on November 9,
1965, triggered a series of mechanical and electrical events that
blacked out power to the entire northeastern United States and
significant portions of Canada; now we’re warned that Russian
hackers may be as interested in disrupting America’s power grid
as they have been in disrupting its elections.6 In 2010, com-
puterized trading programs were blamed for a “flash crash” on
Wall Street, when the Dow Jones Industrial Average plunged
more than 900 points in a matter of minutes. “We have a mar-
ket that responds in milliseconds,” said a finance expert quoted
by the New York Times, “but the humans monitoring respond


===== PDF PAGE 014 =====

Foreword                                                              xiii



in minutes, and unfortunately billions of dollars of damage can
occur in the meantime.” Stocks rebounded quickly on that occa-
sion, but a 2018 report from J.P. Morgan warned that a more
extensive crash spurred by electronic trading algorithms could
lead to social chaos.7
   Given the profits they engender, it’s unlikely we’ll stop using
electronic trading programs anytime soon, which points to the
driver of technological folly that most enraged Wiener: greed, for
both money and power. He regularly railed against the “huck-
sters” in commerce and “gadget worshippers” in science whose
cupidity leads irrevocably, he believed, to “no homeostasis what-
ever.” Readers will find piquant examples of Wiener’s disdain for
the captains of capitalist industry in Cybernetics; here’s one from
his follow-­up book, The Human Use of Human Beings:

   So long as anything remained of the rich endowment of nature with
   which we started, our national hero has been the exploiter who has
   done the most to turn this endowment into ready cash. In our theo-
   ries of free enterprise, we have exalted him as if he had been the
   creator of the riches which he has stolen and squandered. We have
   lived for the day of our prosperity, and we have hoped that some
   benevolent heaven would forgive our excesses and make life possible
   for our impoverished grandchildren. This is what is known as the
   fifth freedom.
       Under these conditions, the new resources given by invention
   have naturally been turned to the even more rapid exploitation of
   the resources of our soil. ... This game has another name than that of
   war. It is also called beggar-­your-­neighbor.8

Where did this willingness to so vehemently attack the powers
that be come from? The same place, I suspect, that accounted
for the magnificent originality of Wiener’s science, and also for
the notorious difficulties of his personality. That place was his
childhood.


===== PDF PAGE 015 =====

xiv                                                       Foreword



      Wiener showed signs of genius almost from infancy. Accord-
ing to Dark Hero of the Information Age, the superb biography
by Flo Conway and Jim Siegelman, he was reading by the age
of three and reciting in Greek and Latin by the age of five. As a
child, he was consuming books of philosophy and literature that
would enrich his writing as an adult. By the time he was ten, he
was studying chemistry, geometry, physics, botany, and zoology;
by the age of eleven, he’d entered college. He earned his under-
graduate degree in mathematics from Tufts at fourteen, spent a
year studying philosophy at Cornell, and earned his doctorate
with a thesis on mathematical logic from Harvard at seventeen.9
Wiener joined the faculty of MIT at the age of 23 and remained
there until his death in 1964.
      Like many, if not most, prodigies, Wiener emerged from child-
hood bearing psychological scars, many inflicted by his father.
Unable to find a public or private school that could keep up
with his son, Leo Wiener, an instructor in Slavic languages and
literature at Harvard, began teaching him at home. The course
of study was expansive in the subject areas it covered but brutal
in its execution. In the first volume of his autobiography, Ex-­
Prodigy: My Childhood and Youth (like Cybernetics, a surprise best
seller), Wiener recalls a regimen of “systematic belittling.” Mis-
takes were greeted by explosions of temper, his father progress-
ing rapidly from demanding teacher to “avenger of blood.” This
explains the title Wiener had originally chosen for his memoir:
“The Bent Twig.”10
      His academic precocity made Wiener a minor celebrity—­a
newspaper profile on the occasion of his entry into Tufts called
him “The Most Remarkable Boy in the World”11—­but did him
no favors socially. His physical clumsiness, his poor eyesight,
and his Jewishness further contributed to his profound and


===== PDF PAGE 016 =====

Foreword                                                      xv



permanent self-­
               identification as an outsider. Wiener suffered,
professionally as well as personally, from his uniqueness, but he
also used it. As he put it in the second volume of his autobiog-
raphy, I Am a Mathematician, “I knew very well that I was com-
petitive beyond the run of younger mathematicians, and I knew
equally that this was not a pretty attitude. However, it was not
an attitude which I was free to assume or to reject. I was quite
aware that I was an out among ins and that I would get no shred
of recognition that I did not force. If I was not to be welcomed,
well then, let me be too dangerous to be ignored.”12
  Cybernetics shows frequent evidence of Wiener’s substantial
ego, but just as often shows his willingness to share credit with
his collaborators and other workers in the field. Claude Shan-
non, whose reputation as the father of information theory
would come to overshadow Wiener’s, receives several mentions.
(Shannon earned his masters and doctorate degrees at MIT and,
according to Conway and Siegelman, spent considerable time
talking to Wiener about cybernetics there.) The text is also pep-
pered with examples of Wiener’s literary and philosophical
chops; it’s not often we encounter pages of mathematical for-
mulae interspersed with name-­dropping references to the likes
of Balzac and Hume, Kipling and Carroll.
  It’s likely that the breadth of Wiener’s erudition and ambi-
tion contributed to his eclipse by Shannon. As the subtitle of
Cybernetics shows, Wiener set out to explain how information
is the lingua franca of both animal and machine, a mission
that consciously involved exploring, as he put it, “the bound-
ary regions of science.” Thus, cybernetics as Wiener conceived
it is physically embodied—­understanding the workings of the
human brain and nervous system was a central goal, though at
one point Wiener studied signal transmission in the nerve fibers


===== PDF PAGE 017 =====

xvi                                                         Foreword



of cats—­
        yet consciously holistic and theoretically unlimited.
As the historian Steve J. Heims put it, cybernetics “leads to a
more unified view of the world, including its human inhabit-
ants, where everything is connected to everything else.”13 Shan-
non’s information theory, by contrast, is both highly abstract
and intensely practical, resolutely focused on moving electronic
messages from point A to point B. For him, wrote the literary
scholar N. Katherine Hayles, information is emphatically disem-
bodied, “a probability function with no dimensions, no materi-
ality, and no necessary connection with meaning.”14
      With the advent of digital technology, Shannon’s more cir-
cumscribed approach paradoxically lent itself more readily to a
host of real-­life applications—­they’re at work in the smartphones,
fitness trackers, and countless other devices we use today. So it is
that Shannon has typically received credit for jump-­starting the
computer revolution while Wiener’s legacy remained relatively
obscure. Many scientists believe that is changing. In the bur-
geoning age of artificial intelligence, the line between human
and machine is becoming increasingly blurred. Cybernetics was
far ahead of its time in anticipating how fruitful those parallels
could be.15
      There were personal as well as theoretical reasons for Wiener’s
fading. His books made him a nationally recognized figure, but
he used that fame to take principled public stands against the
use of science—­his science—­to develop new ways to wage war,
exploit labor, and destroy the environment. In these concerns
he was, again, far ahead of his time, as well as uncommonly
outspoken. In an article for the Bulletin of Atomic Scientists, he
said that “the degradation of the position of the scientist as an
independent worker and thinker to that of a morally irresponsi-
ble stooge in a science-­factory has proceeded even more rapidly


===== PDF PAGE 018 =====

Foreword                                                        xvii



and devastatingly than I had expected.”16 Putting his money,
and his career, where his mouth was, Wiener refused to take on
research funded by the military, which effectively excluded him
from much of the cutting-­edge work in computers at a crucial
moment in their history. (I can imagine Wiener smiling with
approval of the Google engineers who insisted in 2018 that the
company withdraw from its commitments to develop advanced
AI capabilities for the Pentagon.17) Wiener also declined offers
from corporations who sought his advice on automating their
factories. “Those who suffer from a power complex,” he wrote
in The Human Use of Human Beings, “find the mechanization of
man a simple way to realize their ambitions.”18
   The impact of Wiener’s ideas was also undermined by his
own demons. According to Conway and Siegelman, he suf-
fered from periods of severe depression during which he would
lose control of his emotions, breaking into sobbing or shouting
fits at the slightest provocation. More than once he threatened
suicide. Wiener’s colleagues at MIT, although mostly unaware
of those episodes, nonetheless at times found him imperious,
temperamental, maddeningly absent-­minded, and neurotically
self-­absorbed. Perhaps most important, Conway and Siegelman
report that in 1951 Wiener abruptly abandoned leadership of a
new neurophysiology laboratory at MIT—­one that held immense
promise for furthering the growth of cybernetics—­after his wife
convinced him, falsely, that more than one of his partners in the
venture had seduced his nineteen-­year-­old daughter. Wiener’s
fears that his colleagues were attempting to steal credit for cyber-
netics made him more likely to believe the story.19
   Reviewers of Ex-­Prodigy remarked that, despite his many
successes, Wiener’s life story seemed imbued with sadness. His
writings reveal a deep skepticism about human nature. Earlier,


===== PDF PAGE 019 =====

xviii                                                     Foreword



I mentioned Wiener’s comment that he used his outsider status
to fuel his creative drive. Steve Heims noted a similar sentiment
in a journal article Wiener cowrote, criticizing Rudyard Kipling
for his “fear-­based conformity.” In a comment that could easily
have reflected Wiener’s view of himself, the piece added, “The
marginal man is always relatively the more civilized human
being.”20
    Throughout his life, Wiener harbored another conviction that
in my view was equally important in fueling his genius, and that
was his recognition of uncertainty. It’s remarkable that at the age
of ten he wrote a paper entitled “The Theory of Ignorance,” in
which he proclaimed “the impossibility of man’s being certain
of anything.” He mentions the paper in the second volume of
his autobiography. “Even at that time,” he wrote, “I was struck
by the impossibility of originating a perfectly tight theory with
the aid of so loose a mechanism as the human mind.” A key
moment on his path to cybernetics came when he discovered
the statistical mechanics theories of his scientific hero, Josiah
Willard Gibbs, whose applications of probability demonstrated,
Wiener said, that chance is part of the “warp and weft” of phys-
ics. This in turn affirmed his belief that it would be a mistake to
view the world as purely rational.21
    That Wiener’s warnings about technology haven’t been
heeded in the long run isn’t surprising; technological advance
and enthusiasm for technological advance have been drowning
out the warnings of skeptics for centuries. The surprise was that
Cybernetics and his other books and articles received as much ini-
tial attention as they did. Nonetheless, the attitudes of the public
do seem to have shifted in his direction. After years of enam-
ored embrace of Google, Facebook, Amazon, YouTube, and any
number of other internet attractions, a host of problems—­loss of


===== PDF PAGE 020 =====

Foreword                                                              xix



privacy, tech addiction, and subverted elections among them—­
has, for many, provoked serious doubts. And it’s not just the
users who are having second thoughts.22
   In several of his works, including this one, Wiener mentions
Goethe’s “The Sorcerer’s Apprentice,” “The Fisherman and the
Genie” from One Thousand and One Nights, and W. W. Jacobs’s
short story, “The Monkey’s Paw.” In one way or another, the
protagonists of all three tales end up asking themselves how
the magic they thought would deliver them could have gone
so horribly wrong. A series of scandals, beginning with revela-
tions of social media’s contributions to the election of Donald
Trump, has caused many of Silicon Valley’s would-­be wizards to
ask themselves, belatedly, the same question.

Doug Hill is the author of Not So Fast: Thinking Twice About Technology.


===== PDF PAGE 021 =====



===== PDF PAGE 022 =====

Foreword


Sanjoy K. Mitter




The first edition of Norbert Wiener’s book, Cybernetics, or Control
and Communication in the Animal and the Machine, was published
in 1948. Interestingly enough, so was Claude Shannon’s seminal
paper, “A Mathematical Theory of Communication.”1 William
Shockley’s paper on the transistor followed in 1949.2 These texts,
combined with Alan Turing’s “On Computable Numbers, with
an Application to the Entscheidungsproblem” (1937) and the work
of John von Neumann (e.g., his 1958 book, The Computer and
the Brain), comprise the foundations of the Information Revolu-
tion, with the invention of the transistor forming the techno-
logical foundation of this revolution.3 Cybernetics is concerned
with the role that the concept of information plays in the sci-
ences of communication, control, and statistical mechanics. It
is at once philosophical and technical, the contrasting points of
view interspersed throughout the book. Thus, the first chapter is
centered on Newtonian and Bergsonian time, which plays a role
in the evolution of physics from Newtonian physics to statistical
mechanics, reversibility to irreversibility, and finally to quantum
mechanics. It ends with a discussion of machines in the modern
age. Wiener suggests that there should be an identification of
theory of automata with that of the nervous system:


===== PDF PAGE 023 =====

xxii                                                            Foreword



   To sum up: the many automata of the present age are coupled to
   the outside world both for the reception of impressions and for the
   performance of actions. They contain sense organs, effectors, and
   the equivalent of a nervous system to integrate the transfer of infor-
   mation from the one to the other. They lend themselves very well
   to description in physiological terms. It is scarcely a miracle that
   they can be subsumed under one theory with the mechanisms of
   physiology.4

Chapter VIII, “Information, Language, and Society,” provides a
discussion of the potential of Wiener’s ideas on communication
and control to social sciences, and offers a word of caution.

   I mention this matter because of the considerable, and I think false,
   hopes which some of my friends have built for the social efficacy of
   whatever new ways of thinking this book may contain. They are cer-
   tain that our control over our material environment has far outgrown
   our control over our social environment and our understanding
   thereof. Therefore, they consider that the main task of the immediate
   future is to extend to the fields of anthropology, of sociology, of eco-
   nomics, the methods of the natural sciences, in the hope of achiev-
   ing a like measure of success in the social fields. From believing this
   necessary, they come to believe it possible. In this, I maintain, they
   show an excessive optimism, and a misunderstanding of the nature
   of all scientific achievement.5

Wiener was broadly interested in the informational aspects of
the field of communication as well as its relationship to control,
computation, and the study of the nervous system, in contrast
to Shannon’s probabilistic definition of communication, which
is defined in his 1948 paper cited earlier (figure 0.1). Shannon
introduces the concept of mutual information and defines the
concept of channel capacity as maximizing the mutual informa-
tion between the input and output to the channel. Mutual infor-
mation, expressed as


===== PDF PAGE 024 =====

Foreword                                                             xxiii




Figure 0.1
Shannon’s model of a communication system.
Source: Based on Claude E. Shannon, “A Mathematical Theory of Com-
munication,” Bell System Technical Journal 27, no. 3 (July–­October 1948):
381, figure 1.



                    P 
I ( X ; Y ) = EPXY  XY 
                    PX PY  ,
       C = max I ( X ; Y )
              Px



is a measure of the average probabilistic dependence between
two random variables. The main result is Shannon’s noisy-­
channel coding theorem, which states that if the message is
transmitted through coding at a rate lower than the capacity of
the channel, then there exists a coding scheme and a method
of decoding the channel’s output such that the probability of
error can be made to tend to zero, provided the coder-­decoder is
permitted to have infinite delay. If transmission is at a rate below
capacity, however, no such coding-­decoding scheme exists. This
result is asymptotic and akin to proceeding toward a thermo-
dynamic limit in statistical mechanics. The concept of entropy
enters Shannon’s work in relation to compressing data without
losing information by means of the source coding theorem. Thus,
Wiener’s interests in the science of communication are broad
and Shannon’s narrower.
   Wiener made seminal contributions to the field of mathemat-
ics. His fundamental work on the definition of Brownian motion
established a probability measure, the Wiener measure, on the
space of trajectories. The Wiener measure plays an important


===== PDF PAGE 025 =====

xxiv                                                             Foreword



role in modern theories of filtering and stochastic control, sto-
chastic finance, and, indeed, in any physical situation where the
net effect of a huge number of tiny contributions from naturally
independent sources is observed.6 This theory plays an important
role in the main technical part of the book: chapter III, “Time
Series, Information, and Communication,” which is concerned
with the problems of optimal filtering and predication of sig-
nals from noisy observation and the information-­theoretic con-
nections between the two. Among his other contributions, let
me cite Wiener’s work on generalized harmonic analysis, which
forms the basis of Wiener’s work on linear filtering and predic-
tion.7 It is called generalized harmonic analysis since this theory
would handle both periodic phenomena and signals composed
of a continuum of frequencies.
   Wiener was interested in defining the concept of information
and the fundamental role it plays in communication, control,
and statistical mechanics, both conceptually and mathemati-
cally. His views are captured in the introduction to the second
edition of Cybernetics:

   In doing this, we have made of communication engineering design a
   statistical science, a branch of statistical mechanics. ... The notion of
   the amount of information attaches itself very naturally to a classical
   notion in statistical mechanics: that of entropy. Just as the amount of
   information in a system is a measure of its degree of organization, so
   the entropy of a system is a measure of its degree of disorganization;
   and the one is simply the negative of the other.8

   Wiener’s definition of information was in terms of the con-
cept of entropy. The entropy of a discrete random variable P is
given by
            n
H ( P ) = −∑ pi log pi ,
           i =1


===== PDF PAGE 026 =====

Foreword                                                       xxv



and by

H ( P ) = − ∫ p( x)log p( x)dx

for a continuous random variable with density p(x). Note that
Wiener uses a + sign—­entropy is a measure of order, hence Wie-
ner’s definition. This is studied in the context of the problem of
communication, that is, recovering the information contained
in the message corrupted by noise. The message as well as the
noise are both modeled as a stationary time series. Brownian
motion, or white noise, plays an important part as a building
block in the modeling of the message and measurement as sta-
tionary time series.


Wiener Filtering

Consider the problem of estimating a stochastic process Z(·) at
time t given noisy observation

y(τ ) = Z(τ ) + v(τ )                                         (0.1)
by using a time-­invariant linear filter h(·), such that

 (t ) = ∞ h(t − τ )y(τ )dτ
Z       ∫ −∞
                                                              (0.2)

and

           (t ) 2
E Z(t ) − Z                                                   (0.3)

is a minimum.
    Let Z(·) and v(r) be a zero-­mean jointly stationary stochastic
process. It can be shown that the optimum filter satisfies
               ∞
ϕ zy (t ) = ∫ h(t − τ )ϕ yy (τ )dτ ,
           −∞


===== PDF PAGE 027 =====

xxvi                                                    Foreword



and that φzy and φyy are cross-­correlation and autocorrelation
functions. Taking Fourier transforms, and assuming signal and
noise are uncorrelated, we get

                 Φ zz (ω )
H (ω ) =                         .
           Φ zz (ω ) + Φ vv (ω )

When the observations y(·) are restricted to the past and the
noise is white with covariance R, we have to solve the Wiener–­
Hopf equation
            ∞
Rk(t ) + ∫ k(τ )Φ zz (t − τ )dτ = Φ zz (t ), t ≥ 0.
           0


The solution of the Wiener–­Hopf equation is given by

K(ω ) = 1 − R1 2ψ −1 (ω ),

where ψ(ω) is the canonical factor of Φzz(ω).
   The ideas presented here relate to the development of chap-
ter III of this book, notably equations (3.914) and (3.915),
which represent the mean-­square filtering error. An expression
for the total amount of information in the message is given in
equations (3.921) and (3.922). For a modern treatment of the
additive white Gaussian channel with or without feedback,
the main computation is the mutual information between the
message and the received signal.9
   As mentioned earlier, Wiener made fundamental contribu-
tions to the theory of Brownian motion and, indeed, provided
the rigorous definition of the Wiener measure. Together with
Paley, he gave a definition of stochastic integration of a deter-
ministic function. The theory of Markov processes and their
connections to partial differential equations were well under-
stood through the work of Kolmogorov and Feller.10 The theory
of stochastic differential equations was developed by Ito in 1944


===== PDF PAGE 028 =====

Foreword                                                     xxvii



in his fundamental paper. These developments must have been
known to Wiener. Surprisingly, Wiener did not use any of these
developments in his work on filtering and prediction. It was left
to R. E. Kalman to formulate the optimal filtering and prediction
problem as a problem in the theory of Gauss–­Markov processes.11
Relative to the Wiener formulation, Kalman made an assump-
tion that the Gauss–­Markov processes are finite dimensional. In
terms of modeling, the signal and noise as stationary processes
would be equivalent to assuming that the spectral density of the
processes are rational.
   For the representation of the signal as a linear function of
a Gauss–­Markov process (state-­space representation), and linear
observation in white noise,

dxt = Fxt dt + Gd βt
                                                             (0.4)
dzt = Hxt dt + dwt ,

the best linear estimate of the state, given the observations, can
be derived

dxˆt = Fxˆt dt + K(t ) [dyt − Hxˆt dt ]        
                                               
dP                                             ,            (0.5)
   = GG ′ − P(t )H ′ HP(t ) + FP(t ) + P(t )F′ 
dt                                             

where x̂t is the best linear estimate given the noisy observations
from the time 0 to t and P(t) is the error covariance. This is the
celebrated Kalman–­Bucy filter. The problem of prediction can be
solved using essentially the same methods.12


Wiener and Control

Wiener also suggested that his ideas for the design of optimal
filters can be applied to the design of linear control system
compensators.14 Finally, these Wiener–­Kalman ideas culminate


===== PDF PAGE 029 =====

xxviii                                                         Foreword




Figure 0.2
System model and continuous Kalman filter.13


in the linear quadratic Gaussian problem and in the separation
theorem, the separation being between optimal filtering and
optimal control.15
   Wiener was interested in the concept of feedback and its
effects on dynamical systems. His ideas on information feedback
are particularly interesting:
   Another interesting variant of feedback systems is found in the way
   in which we steer a car on an icy road. Our entire conduct of driv-
   ing depends on a knowledge of the slipperiness of the road surface,
   that is, on a knowledge of the performance characteristics of the
   system car-­road. If we wait to find this out by the ordinary perfor-
   mance of the system, we shall discover ourselves in a skid before we
   know it. We thus give to the steering wheel a succession of small, fast
   impulses, not enough to throw the car into a major skid but quite
   enough to report to our kinesthetic sense whether the car is in danger
   of skidding, and we regulate our method of steering accordingly.
       This method of control, which we may call control by informative
   feedback, is not difficult to schematize into a mechanical form and
   may well be worthwhile employing in practice. We have a compensa-
   tor for our effector, and this compensator has a characteristic which


===== PDF PAGE 030 =====

Foreword                                                             xxix




Figure 0.3
Feedback system17


   may be varied from outside. We superimpose on the incoming mes-
   sage a weak high-­frequency input and take off the output of the effec-
   tor a partial output of the same high frequency, separated from the
   rest of the output by an appropriate filter. We explore the amplitude-­
   phase relations of the high-­frequency output to the input in order to
   obtain the performance characteristics of the effector. On the basis
   of this, we modify in the appropriate sense the characteristics of the
   compensator.16


Wiener and Statistical Mechanics

Wiener’s most interesting ideas about statistical mechanics are
those related to the Maxwell demon.

   A very important idea in statistical mechanics is that of the Maxwell
   demon. ... We shall actually find that Maxwell demons in the strictest
   sense cannot exist in a system in equilibrium, but if we accept this
   from the beginning, and so not try to demonstrate it, we shall miss an
   admirable opportunity to learn something about entropy and about
   possible physical, chemical, and biological systems.


===== PDF PAGE 031 =====

xxx                                                           Foreword



      For a Maxwell demon to act, it must receive information from
   approaching particles concerning their velocity and point of impact
   on the wall. Whether these impulses involve a transfer of energy or
   not, they must involve a coupling of the demon and the gas. Now,
   the law of the increase of entropy applies to a completely isolated
   system but does not apply to a non-­isolated part of such a system.
   Accordingly, the only entropy which concerns us is that of the sys-
   tem gas-­demon, and not that of the gas alone. The gas entropy is
   merely one term in the total entropy of the larger system. Can we
   find terms involving the demon as well which contribute to this total
   entropy?
      Most certainly we can. The demon can only act on information
   received, and this information, as we shall see in the next chapter,
   represents a negative entropy.18

   Current work on the Maxwell demon and non-­equilibrium
statistical mechanics is very much in this spirit. Ideas about
optimal control and information theory are linked to this devel-
opment. A classical expression of the second law states that
the maximum (average) work extractable from a system in con-
tact with a single thermal bath cannot exceed the free-­energy
decrease between the system’s initial and final equilibrium
states. As illustrated by Szilard’s heat engine, however, it is pos-
sible to break this bound under the assumption of additional
information available to the work-­extracting agent. To account
for this possibility, the second law can be generalized to include
transformations using feedback control. In particular, the work of
Henrik Sandberg and colleagues shows that under feedback con-
trol the extracted work W must satisfy

W ≤ kTI c ,                                                       (0.6)

where k is Boltzmann’s constant, T is the temperature of the bath,
and Ic is the so-­called transfer entropy from the system to the mea-
surement.19 Note that in equation (0.6) we have assumed there is


===== PDF PAGE 032 =====

Foreword                                                               xxxi



no decrease in free energy from the initial to the final state. An
explicit finite time counterpart to equation (0.6) characterizing
the maximum work extractable using feedback control in terms
of the transfer entropy from the system to the measurement is
presented. To see this, consider the system shown in figure 0.4:

 τ dv(t ) = − v(t )dt + Ri(t )dt + 2 kR dw(t ),        v (0) = 0 
                                                                 
                                                       kT        ,   (0.7)
vmeas (t ) = v(t )dt + Vmeas dwmeas ,        v(0)2   =           
                                                       C

with v(0), unit Gaussian; w and mwmeas, standard Brownian
motion; w and wmeas, independent; Vmeas, the intensity of the
measurement noise; and τ = RC.
    It can be shown that the maximum extractable work is
given by
                 t
Wmax (t ) = K ∫ Tmin (t )dI c (t ) ≤ KTI c (t ) .                     (0.8)
                 0


Here, Tmin(t) can be interpretated as the lowest achievable sys-
tem temperature after t time units of continuous feedback con-
trol, assuming an initial equilibrium of Tmin(0) = T. The transfer




Figure 0.4
Source: Henrik Sandberg, Jean-­Charles Delvenne, N. J. Newton, and S. K.
Mitter, “Maximum Work Extraction and Implementation Costs for Non-
equilibrium Maxwell’s Demon,” Physical Review E 90 (2014): 042119,
https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevE.90.042119.


===== PDF PAGE 033 =====

xxxii                                                            Foreword



entropy, or mutual information, Ic(t) measures the amount of
useful information transmitted to the controller from the partial
observations:

I c (t ) = I (v0 , w0t vmeas
                        t
                             ).                                       (0.9)

Equation (0.8) can be considered as a generalization of the sec-
ond law of thermodynamics. The result in equation (0.8) uses
the theory of optimal control and the separation theorem of the
linear quadratic Gaussian problem.20


Wiener and Non-­linear Systems

Wiener’s approach to non-­linear systems is related to his work
on homogeneous chaos and the representation of L2 functions
of Brownian motion (white noise) as an infinite sum of multiple
Wiener integrals.21 In contrast to Wiener’s definition, the mul-
tiple Wiener integral as defined by Kiyosi Ito renders integrals of
different orders orthogonal to each other.22 Wiener’s approach
to learning views a non-­linear input map in terms of the above
representation, and estimates the coefficients using least-­squares
optimization. We can do no better than cite Wiener on this
approach:

    While both Professor Gabor’s methods and my own lead to the con-
    struction of non-­linear transducers, they are linear to the extent that
    the non-­linear transducer is represented with an output which is the
    sum of the outputs of a set of non-­linear transducers with the same
    input. These outputs are combined with varying linear coefficients.
    This allows us to employ the theory of linear developments in the
    design and specification of the non-­linear transducer. And in particu-
    lar, this method allows us to obtain coefficients of the constituent
    elements by a least-­square process. If we join this to a method of
    statistically averaging over the set of all inputs to our apparatus, we
    have essentially a branch of the theory of orthogonal development.


===== PDF PAGE 034 =====

Foreword                                                             xxxiii



   Such a statistical basis of the theory of non-­linear transducers can be
   obtained from an actual study of the past statistics of the inputs used
   in each particular case.
       I ask if this is philosophically very different from what is done
   when a gene acts as a template to form other molecules of the same
   gene from an indeterminate mixture of amino and nucleic acids, or
   when a virus guides into its own form other molecules of the same
   virus out of the tissues and juices of its host. I do not in the least
   claim that the details of these processes are the same, but I do claim
   that they are philosophically very similar phenomena.23
Wiener used these ideas for the study of brain waves. It is worth
pointing out that Wiener was well aware of the issues related
to sampling—­he analyzes the sampling theorem for stochastic
inputs in chapter X, “Brain Waves and Self-­Organizing Systems”:

   I now wish to take up the sampling problem. For this I shall have to
   introduce some ideas from my previous work on integration in func-
   tion space.24 With the aid of this tool, we shall be able to construct
   a statistical model of a continuing process with a given spectrum.
   While this model is not an exact replica of the process that generates
   brain waves, it is near enough to it to yield statistically significant
   information concerning the root-­mean-­square error to be expected
   in brain-­ wave spectra such as the one already presented in this
   chapter.25


Neuroscience and Artificial Intelligence

Wiener seems to have been interested in problems that continue
to affect interactions between neuroscience and artificial intelli-
gence, such as understanding the functioning of the sensorimo-
tor system, brain–­machine interfaces, and computation through
neural circuits. Let me cite some of his ideas related to the vision
system. Wiener emphasized that the process of recognition of
an object needs to be invariant under an appropriate group of


===== PDF PAGE 035 =====

xxxiv                                                  Foreword



transformations, for example, the Euclidean group. He then con-
siders the process of scanning the Euclidean group by defining a
measure on the transformation group.
   Voluntary movement is a result of signals transmitted through
a communication channel that links the internal world in our
minds to the physical world around us. What is the nature of
this communication? What is “intention” in this context? These
questions remain quite unanswered today.
   In conclusion, Cybernetics, or Control and Communication in
the Animal and the Machine attempts to create a comprehen-
sive statistical theory of communication, control, and statisti-
cal mechanics. The book is a challenging mix of mathematics
and prose, but it contains deep conceptual ideas and the patient
reader will gain much from it.


===== PDF PAGE 036 =====

Preface to the Second Edition




When I wrote the first edition of Cybernetics some thirteen years
ago, I did it under some serious handicaps which had the effect
of piling up unfortunate typographical errors, together with a
few errors of content. Now I believe the time has come to recon-
sider cybernetics, not merely as a program to be carried out at
some period in the future, but as an existing science. I have
therefore taken this opportunity to put the necessary corrections
at the disposal of my readers and, at the same time, to present an
amplification of the present status of the subject and of the new
related modes of thought which have come into being since its
first publication.
   If a new scientific subject has real vitality, the center of inter-
est in it must and should shift in the course of years. When I
first wrote Cybernetics, the chief obstacles which I found in
making my point were that the notions of statistical informa-
tion and control theory were novel and perhaps even shocking
to the established attitudes of the time. At present, they have
become so familiar as a tool of the communication engineers
and of the designers of automatic controls that the chief dan-
ger against which I must guard is that the book may seem trite
and commonplace. The role of feedback both in engineering


===== PDF PAGE 037 =====

xxxvi                                  Preface to the Second Edition



design and in biology has come to be well established. The role
of information and the technique of measuring and transmit-
ting information constitute a whole discipline for the engineer,
for the physiologist, for the psychologist, and for the sociologist.
The automata which the first edition of this book barely forecast
have come into their own, and the related social dangers against
which I warned, not only in this book, but also in its small popu-
lar companion The Human Use of Human Beings,1 have risen well
above the horizon.
   Thus it behooves the cyberneticist to move on to new fields
and to transfer a large part of his attention to ideas which have
arisen in the developments of the last decade. The simple linear
feedbacks, the study of which was so important in awakening
scientists to the role of cybernetic study, now are seen to be far
less simple and far less linear than they appeared at first view.
Indeed, in the early days of electric circuit theory, the mathe-
matical resources for systematic treatment of circuit networks
did not go beyond linear juxtapositions of resistances, capaci-
ties, and inductances. This meant that the entire subject could
be adequately described in terms of the harmonic analysis of the
messages transmitted, and of the impedances, admittances, and
voltage ratios of the circuits through which the messages were
passed.
   Long before the publication of Cybernetics, it came to be real-
ized that the study of non-­linear circuits (such as we find in
many amplifiers, in voltage limiters, in rectifiers, and the like)
did not fit easily into this frame. Nevertheless, for want of a bet-
ter methodology, many attempts were made to extend the linear
notions of the older electrical engineering well beyond the point
where the newer types of apparatus could be naturally expressed
in terms of these.


===== PDF PAGE 038 =====

Preface to the Second Edition                                 xxxvii



        When I came to M.I.T. around 1920, the general mode of put-
ting the questions concerning non-­linear apparatus was to look
for a direct extension of the notion of impedance which would
cover linear as well as non-­linear systems. The result was that the
study of non-­linear electrical engineering was getting into a state
comparable with that of the last stages of the Ptolemaic system
of astronomy, in which epicycle was piled on epicycle, correc-
tion upon correction, until a vast patchwork structure ultimately
broke down under its own weight.
        Just as the Copernican system arose out of the wreck of the
overstrained Ptolemaic system, with a simple and natural helio-
centric description of the motions of the heavenly bodies instead
of the complicated and unperspicuous Ptolemaic geocentric sys-
tem, so the study of non-­linear structures and systems, whether
electric or mechanical, whether natural or artificial, has heeded
a fresh and independent point of commencement. I have tried
to initiate a new approach in my book Nonlinear Problems in Ran-
dom Theory.2 It turns out that the overwhelming importance of
a trigonometric analysis in the treatment of linear phenomena
does not persist when we come to consider non-­linear phenom-
ena. There is a clear-­cut mathematical reason for this. Electrical
circuit phenomena, like many other physical phenomena, are
characterized by an invariance with respect to a shift of origin in
time. A physical experiment which will have arrived at a certain
stage by 2 o’clock if we started at noon, will have arrived at the
same stage at 2:15 if we started at 12:15. Thus the laws of physics
concern invariants of the translation group in time.
        The trigonometric functions sin nt and cos nt show certain
important invariants with respect to the same translation group.
The general function

e iωt


===== PDF PAGE 039 =====

xxxviii                                          Preface to the Second Edition



will go into the function

e iω (t +τ ) = e iωτ e iωt

of the same form under the translation which we obtain by add-
ing τ to t. As a consequence,

a cos n (t + τ ) + b sin n (t + τ )
     = ( a cos nτ + b sin nτ ) cos nt + ( b cos nτ − a sin nτ ) sin nt
     = a1 cos nt + b1 sin nt

In other words, the families of functions

Ae iωt
and

A cos ωt + B sin ωt

are invariant under translation.
     Now there are other families of functions which are invariant
under translations. If I consider the so-­called random walk in
which the movement of a particle under any time interval has
a distribution dependent only on the length of that time inter-
val and independent of everything that has happened up to its
initiation, the ensemble of random walks will also go into itself
under the time translation.
     In other words, the mere translational invariance of the trigo-
nometric curves is a property shared by other sets of functions
as well.
     The property which is characteristic of the trigonometric
functions in addition to these invariants is that

Ae iωt + Be iωt = ( A + B ) e iωt
so that these functions form an extremely simple linear set. It
will be noted that this property concerns linearity; that is, that
we can reduce all oscillations of a given frequency to a linear


===== PDF PAGE 040 =====

Preface to the Second Edition                                        xxxix



combination of two. It is this specific property which creates the
value of harmonic analysis in the treatment of the linear proper-
ties of electric circuits. The functions

e iωt

are characters of the translation group and yield a linear repre-
sentation of this group.
        When, however, we deal with combinations of functions other
than addition with constant coefficients—­when for example we
multiply two functions by one another—­the simple trigonomet-
ric functions no longer show this elementary group property.
On the other hand, the random functions such as appear in the
random walk do have certain properties very suitable for the dis-
cussion of their non-­linear combinations.
        It is scarcely desirable for me to go into the detail of this work
here, for it is mathematically rather complicated, and it is cov-
ered in my book Nonlinear Problems in Random Theory. The mate-
rial in that book has already been put to considerable use in the
discussion of specific non-­linear problems, but much remains
to be done in carrying out the program laid down there. What
it amounts to in practice is that an appropriate test input for
the study of non-­linear systems is rather of the character of the
Brownian motion than a set of trigonometric functions. This
Brownian motion function in the case of electric circuits can
be generated physically by the shot effect. This shot effect is a
phenomenon of irregularity in electrical currents which arises
from the fact that such currents are carried not as a continuous
stream of electricity but as a sequence of indivisible and equal
electrons. Thus electric currents are subject to statistical irregu-
larities which are themselves of a certain uniform character and
which can be amplified up to the point at which they constitute
an appreciable random noise.


===== PDF PAGE 041 =====

xl                                       Preface to the Second Edition



     As I shall show in Chapter IX, this theory of random noise can
be put into practical use not merely for the analysis of electrical
circuits and other non-­linear processes but for their synthesis as
well.3 The device which is used is the reduction of the output of
a non-­linear instrument with random input to a well-­defined
series of certain orthonormal functions which are closely related
to the Hermite polynomials. The problem of the analysis of a
non-­linear circuit consists in the determination of the coeffi-
cients of these polynomials in certain parameters of the input by
a process of averaging.
     The description of this process is rather simple. In addition to
the black box which represents an as yet unanalyzed non-­linear
system, I have certain bodies of known structure which I shall
call white boxes representing the various terms in the expansion
desired.4 I put the same random noise into the black box and
into a given white box. The coefficient of the white box in the
development of the black box is given as an average of the prod-
uct of their outputs. While this average is taken over the entire
ensemble of shot-­effect inputs, there is a theorem which allows
us to replace this average in all but a set of cases of probability
by an average taken over time. To obtain this average, we need
to have at our disposal a multiplying instrument by which we
can get the product of the outputs of the black and the white
box, as well as an averaging instrument, which we can base on
the fact that the potential across a condenser is proportional
to the quantity of electricity held in the condenser and hence to
the time integral of the current flowing through it.
     Not only is it possible to determine the coefficients of each
white box constituting an additive part of the equivalent repre-
sentation of the black box one by one, but it is also possible to
determine these quantities simultaneously. It is even possible by


===== PDF PAGE 042 =====

Preface to the Second Edition                                   xli



the use of appropriate feedback devices to make each one of the
white boxes automatically adjust itself to the level correspond-
ing to its coefficient in the development of the black box. In this
manner we are able to construct a multiple white box which,
when it is properly connected to a black box and is subjected to
the same random input, will automatically form itself into an
operational equivalent of the black box even though its internal
structure may be vastly different.
   These operations of analysis, synthesis, and automatic self-­
adjustment of white boxes into the likeness of black boxes can be
carried out by other methods which have been described by Pro-
fessor Amar Bose5 and by Professor Gabor.6 In all of them there
is a use of some process of working in, or learning, by choosing
appropriate inputs for the black and white boxes and comparing
them; and in many of these processes, including the method
of Professor Gabor, multiplication devices play an important
role. While there are many approaches to the problem of mul-
tiplying two functions electrically, this task is not technically
easy. On the one hand, a good multiplier must work over a large
range of amplitudes. On the other hand, it must be so nearly
instantaneous in its operation that it will be accurate up to high
frequencies. Gabor claims for his multiplier a frequency range
running to about 1,000 cycles. In his inaugural dissertation for
the chair of Professor of Electrical Engineering at the Imperial
College of Science and Technology of the University of London,
he does not state explicitly the amplitude range over which his
method of multiplication is valid nor the degree of accuracy to
be obtained. I am awaiting very eagerly an explicit statement
of these properties so that we can give a good evaluation of
the multiplier for use in other pieces of apparatus dependent
on it.


===== PDF PAGE 043 =====

xlii                                      Preface to the Second Edition



       All of these devices in which an apparatus assumes a specific
structure or function on the basis of past experience lead to a
very interesting new attitude both in engineering and in biol-
ogy. In engineering, devices of similar character can be used not
only to play games and perform other purposive acts but to do
so with a continual improvement of performance on the basis
of past experience. I shall discuss some of these possibilities in
Chapter IX of this book. Biologically, we have at least an ana-
logue to what is perhaps the central phenomenon of life. For
heredity to be possible and for cells to multiply, it is necessary
that the heredity-­carrying components of a cell—­the so-­called
genes—­be able to construct other similar heredity-­carrying struc-
tures in their own image. It is, therefore, very exciting for us to
be in possession of a means by which engineering structures can
produce other structures with a function similar to their own.
I shall devote Chapter X to this, and in particular shall discuss
how oscillating systems of a given frequency can reduce other
oscillating systems to the same frequency.
       It is often stated that the production of any specific kind of
molecule in the image of existing ones has an analogy to the use
of templates in engineering whereby we can use a functional
element of a machine as the pattern on which another similar
element is made. The image of the template is a static one, and
there must be some process by which one gene molecule manu-
factures another. I give the tentative suggestion that frequencies,
let us say the frequencies of molecular spectra, may be the pat-
tern elements which carry the identity of biological substances;
and the self-­organization of genes may be a manifestation of the
self-­organization of frequencies which I shall discuss later.
       I have already spoken of learning machines in a general way.
I shall devote a chapter to a more detailed discussion of these


===== PDF PAGE 044 =====

Preface to the Second Edition                                       xliii



machines and potentialities and some of the problems of their
use. Here I wish to make a few comments of a general nature.
   As will be seen in Chapter I, the notion of learning machines
is as old as cybernetics itself. In the anti-­aircraft predictors which
I described, the linear characteristics of the predictor which is
used at any given time depend on a long-­time acquaintance
with the statistics of the ensemble of time series which we desire
to predict. While a knowledge of these characteristics can be
worked out mathematically in accordance with the principles
which I have given there, it is perfectly possible to devise a com-
puter which will work up these statistics and develop the short-­
time characteristics of the predictor on the basis of an experience
which is already observed by the same machine as is used for
prediction and which is worked up automatically. This can go far
beyond the purely linear predictor. In various papers by Kallian-
pur, Masani, Akutowicz, and myself,7 we have developed a the-
ory of non-­linear prediction which can at least conceivably be
mechanized in a similar manner with the use of long-­time obser-
vations to give the statistical basis for short-­time prediction.
   The theory of linear prediction and of non-­linear prediction
both involve some criteria of the goodness of fit of the predic-
tion. The simplest criterion, although by no means the only
usable one, is that of minimizing the mean square of the error.
This is used in a particular form in connection with the func-
tionals of the Brownian motion which I employ for the con-
struction of non-­linear apparatus, inasmuch as the various terms
of my development have certain orthogonality properties. These
ensure that the partial sum of a finite number of these terms is
the best simulation of the apparatus to be imitated, which can
be made by the employment of these terms if the mean square
criterion of error is to be maintained. The work of Gabor also


===== PDF PAGE 045 =====

xliv                                   Preface to the Second Edition



depends upon mean square criterion of error, but in a more gen-
eral way, applicable to time series obtained by experience.
   The notion of learning machines can be extended far beyond
its employment for predictors, filters, and other similar appara-
tus. It is particularly important for the study and construction
of machines which play a competitive game like checkers. Here
the vital work has been done by Samuel8 and Watanabe9 at the
laboratories of the International Business Machines Corpora-
tion. As in the case of filters and predictors, certain functions of
the time series are developed in terms of which a much larger
class of functions can be expanded. These functions can have
numerical evaluations of the significant quantities on which the
successful playing of a game depends. For example, they com-
prise the number of pieces on both sides, the total command
of these pieces, their mobility, and so forth. At the beginning of
the employment of the machine, these various considerations
are given tentative weightings, and the machine chooses that
admissible move for which the total weighting will have a maxi-
mum value. Up to this point, the machine has worked with a
rigid program and has not been a learning machine.
   However, at times the machine assumes a different task.
It tries to expand that function which is 1 for won games, 0
for lost games, and perhaps 21 for drawn games in terms of the
various functions expressing the considerations of which the
machine is able to take cognizance. In this way, it redetermines
the weightings of these considerations so as to be able to play a
more sophisticated game. I shall discuss some of the properties
of these machines in Chapter IX, but here I must point out that
they have been sufficiently successful for the machine to be able
to defeat its programmer in from 10 to 20 hours of learning and
working in. I also wish to mention in that chapter some of the


===== PDF PAGE 046 =====

Preface to the Second Edition                                     xlv



work that has been done on similar machines devised for prov-
ing geometrical theorems and for simulating, to a limited extent,
the logic of induction.
   All of this work is a part of the theory and practice of the pro-
gramming of programming, which has been extensively studied
in the Electronic Systems Laboratory of the Massachusetts Insti-
tute of Technology. Here it has been found cut that unless some
such learning device is employed, the programming of a rigidly
patterned machine is itself a very difficult task and that there is
an urgent need for devices to program this programming.
   Now that the concept of learning machines is applicable to
those machines which we have made ourselves, it is also rel-
evant to those living machines which we call animals, so that
we have the possibility of throwing a new light on biological
cybernetics. Here I wish to single out, among a variety of current
investigations, a book by the Stanley-­Jones on the Kybernetics
(notice the spelling) of living systems.10 In this book they devote
a great deal of attention to those feedbacks which maintain
the working level of the nervous system as well as those other
feedbacks which respond to special stimuli. Since the combina-
tion of the level of the system with the particular responses is
to a considerable extent multiplicative, it is also non-­linear and
involves considerations of the sort we have already brought out.
This field of activity is very much alive at present, and I expect it
to become much more alive in the near future.
   The methods of memory machines and of machines that mul-
tiply themselves which I have so far given are largely, although
not entirely, those which depend on apparatus of a high degree of
specificity, or of what I may call blueprint apparatus. The physi-
ological aspects of the same process must conform more to the
peculiar techniques of living organisms in which blueprints are


===== PDF PAGE 047 =====

xlvi                                  Preface to the Second Edition



replaced by a less specific process, but one in which the system
organizes itself. Chapter X of this book is devoted to a sample of
a self-­organizing process, namely, that by which narrow, highly
specific frequencies are formed in brain waves. It is, therefore,
largely the physiological counterpart of the previous chapter, in
which I am discussing similar processes on more of a blueprint
basis. This existence of sharp frequencies in brain waves and
the theories which I gave to explain how they are originated,
what they can do, and what medical use may be made of them
represent in my mind an important and new break-­through in
physiology. Similar ideas can be used in many other places in
physiology and can make a real contribution to the study of the
fundamentals of life phenomena. In this field, what I am giving
is more a program than work already achieved, but it is a pro-
gram for which I have great hopes.
   It has not been my intention, either in the first edition or in
the present one, to make this book a compendium of all that has
been done in cybernetics. Neither my interests nor my abilities
lie that way. My intention is to express and to amplify my ideas
on this subject, and to display some of the ideas and philosophi-
cal reflections which led me in the beginning to enter upon this
field, and which have continued to interest me in its develop-
ment. Thus it is an intensely personal book, devoting much
space to those developments in which I myself have been inter-
ested, and relatively little to those in which I have not worked
myself.
   I have had valuable help from many quarters in revising this
book. I must acknowledge in particular the cooperation of Miss
Constance D. Boyd of The M.I.T. Press, Dr. Shikao Ikehara of
the Tokyo Institute of Technology, Dr. Y. W. Lee of the Electrical
Engineering Department of M.I.T., and Dr. Gordon Raisbeck of


===== PDF PAGE 048 =====

Preface to the Second Edition                                 xlvii



the Bell Telephone Laboratories. Also, in the writing down of my
new chapters, and particularly in the computations of Chapter
X, in which I have considered the case of self-­organizing systems
which manifest themselves in the study of the electroencepha-
logram, I wish to mention the aid which I received from my stu-
dents, John C. Kotelly and Charles E. Robinson, and especially
the contribution of Dr. John S. Barlow of the Massachusetts Gen-
eral Hospital. The indexing was done by James W. Davis.
   Without the meticulous care and devotion of all of these I
would not have had either the courage or the accuracy to turn
out a new and corrected edition.


                                                 Norbert Wiener
                         Cambridge, Massachusetts, March, 1961


===== PDF PAGE 049 =====



===== PDF PAGE 050 =====

Part I Original Edition (1948)


===== PDF PAGE 051 =====



===== PDF PAGE 052 =====

Introduction




This book represents the outcome, after more than a decade, of
a program of work undertaken jointly with Dr. Arturo Rosenblu-
eth, then of the Harvard Medical School and now of the Instituto
Nacional de Cardiología of Mexico. In those days, Dr. Rosenblu-
eth, who was the colleague and collaborator of the late Dr. Walter
B. Cannon, conducted a monthly series of discussion meetings
on scientific method. The participants were mostly young sci-
entists at the Harvard Medical School, and we would gather for
dinner about a round table in Vanderbilt Hall. The conversa-
tion was lively and unrestrained. It was not a place where it was
either encouraged or made possible for anyone to stand on his
dignity. After the meal, somebody—­either one of our group or
an invited guest—­would read a paper on some scientific topic,
generally one in which questions of methodology were the first
consideration, or at least a leading consideration. The speaker
had to run the gauntlet of an acute criticism, good-­natured but
unsparing. It was a perfect catharsis for half-­baked ideas, insuffi-
cient self-­criticism, exaggerated self-­confidence, and pomposity.
Those who could not stand the gaff did not return, but among
the former habitués of these meetings there is more than one of


===== PDF PAGE 053 =====

4                                                      Introduction



us who feels that they were an important and permanent contri-
bution to our scientific unfolding.
    Not all the participants were physicians or medical scien-
tists. One of us, a very steady member, and a great help to our
discussions, was Dr. Manuel Sandoval Vallarta, a Mexican like
Dr. Rosenblueth and a Professor of Physics at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, who had been among my very first stu-
dents when I came to the Institute after World War I. Dr. Val-
larta used to bring some of his M.I.T. colleagues along to these
discussion meetings, and it was at one of these that I first met
Dr. Rosenblueth. I had been interested in the scientific method
for a long time and had, in fact, been a participant in Josiah
Royce’s Harvard seminar on the subject in 1911–­1913. Moreover,
it was felt that it was essential to have someone present who
could examine mathematical questions critically. I thus became
an active member of the group until Dr. Rosenblueth’s call to
Mexico in 1944 and the general confusion of the war ended the
series of meetings.
    For many years Dr. Rosenblueth and I had shared the con-
viction that the most fruitful areas for the growth of the sci-
ences were those which had been neglected as a no-­man’s land
between the various established fields. Since Leibniz there has
perhaps been no man who has had a full command of all the
intellectual activity of his day. Since that time, science has been
increasingly the task of specialists, in fields which show a ten-
dency to grow progressively narrower. A century ago there may
have been no Leibniz, but there was a Gauss, a Faraday, and a
Darwin. Today there are few scholars who can call themselves
mathematicians or physicists or biologists without restriction.
A man may be a topologist or an acoustician or a coleopterist.
He will be filled with the jargon of his field, and will know all


===== PDF PAGE 054 =====

Introduction                                                       5



its literature and all its ramifications, but, more frequently than
not, he will regard the next subject as something belonging to
his colleague three doors down the corridor, and will consider
any interest in it on his own part as an unwarrantable breach
of privacy. These specialized fields are continually growing and
invading new territory. The result is like what occurred when
the Oregon country was being invaded simultaneously by the
United States settlers, the British, the Mexicans, and the Rus-
sians—­an inextricable tangle of exploration, nomenclature, and
laws. There are fields of scientific work, as we shall see in the
body of this book, which have been explored from the different
sides of pure mathematics, statistics, electrical engineering, and
neurophysiology; in which every single notion receives a sepa-
rate name from each group, and in which important work has
been triplicated or quadruplicated, while still other important
work is delayed by the unavailability in one field of results that
may have already become classical in the next field.
   It is these boundary regions of science which offer the richest
opportunities to the qualified investigator. They are at the same
time the most refractory to the accepted techniques of mass
attack amid the division of labor. If the difficulty of a physiologi-
cal problem is mathematical in essence, ten physiologists igno-
rant of mathematics will get precisely as far as one physiologist
ignorant of mathematics, and no further. If a physiologist who
knows no mathematics works together with a mathematician
who knows no physiology, the one will be unable to state his
problem in terms that the other can manipulate, and the second
will be unable to put the answers in any form that the first can
understand. Dr. Rosenblueth has always insisted that a proper
exploration of these blank spaces on the map of science could
only be made by a team of scientists, each a specialist in his


===== PDF PAGE 055 =====

6                                                      Introduction



own field but each possessing a thoroughly sound and trained
acquaintance with the fields of his neighbors; all in the habit
of working together, of knowing one another’s intellectual cus-
toms, and of recognizing the significance of a colleague’s new
suggestion before it has taken on a full formal expression. The
mathematician need not have the skill to conduct a physiologi-
cal experiment, but he must have the skill to understand one, to
criticize one, and to suggest one. The physiologist need not be
able to prove a certain mathematical theorem, but he must be
able to grasp its physiological significance and to tell the math-
ematician for what he should look. We had dreamed for years
of an institution of independent scientists, working together in
one of these backwoods of science, not as subordinates of some
great executive officer, but joined by the desire, indeed by the
spiritual necessity, to understand the region as a whole, and to
lend one another the strength of that understanding.
    We had agreed on these matters long before we had chosen
the field of our joint investigations and our respective parts in
them. The deciding factor in this new step was the war. I had
known for a considerable time that if a national emergency
should come, my function in it would be determined largely by
two things: my close contact with the program of computing
machines developed by Dr. Vannevar Bush, and my own joint
work with Dr. Yuk Wing Lee on the design of electric networks.
In fact, both proved important. In the summer of 1940, I turned
a large part of my attention to the development of computing
machines for the solution of partial differential equations. I had
long been interested in these and had convinced myself that
their chief problem, as contrasted with the ordinary differential
equations so well treated by Dr. Bush on his differential analyzer,
was that of the representation of functions of more than one


===== PDF PAGE 056 =====

Introduction                                                    7



variable. I had also become convinced that the process of scan-
ning, as employed in television, gave the answer to that ques-
tion and, in fact, that television was destined to be more useful
to engineering by the introduction of such new techniques than
as an independent industry.
   It was clear that any scanning process must vastly increase the
number of data dealt with as compared with the number of data
in a problem of ordinary differential equations. To accomplish
reasonable results in a reasonable time, it thus became necessary
to push the speed of the elementary processes to the maximum,
and to avoid interrupting the stream of these processes by steps
of an essentially slower nature. It also became necessary to per-
form the individual processes with so high a degree of accuracy
that the enormous repetition of the elementary processes should
not bring about a cumulative error so great as to swamp all accu-
racy. Thus the following requirements were suggested:

1. That the central adding and multiplying apparatus of the
   computing machine should be numerical, as in an ordinary
   adding machine, rather than on a basis of measurement, as in
   the Bush differential analyzer.

2. That these mechanisms, which are essentially switching
   devices, should depend on electronic tubes rather than on
   gears or mechanical relays, in order to secure quicker action.

3. That, in accordance with the policy adopted in some exist-
   ing apparatus of the Bell Telephone Laboratories, it would
   probably be more economical in apparatus to adopt the scale
   of two for addition and multiplication, rather than the scale
   of ten.

4. That the entire sequence of operations be laid out on the
   machine itself so that there should be no human intervention


===== PDF PAGE 057 =====

8                                                       Introduction



    from the time the data were entered until the final results
    should be taken off, and that all logical decisions necessary
    for this should be built into the machine itself.

5. That the machine contain an apparatus for the storage of data
    which should record them quickly, hold them firmly until
    erasure, read them quickly, erase them quickly, and then be
    immediately available for the storage of new material.

    These recommendations, together with tentative suggestions
for the means of realizing them, were sent in to Dr. Vannevar
Bush for their possible use in a war. At that stage of the prepara-
tions for war, they did not seem to have sufficiently high priority
to make immediate work on them worth while. Nevertheless,
they all represent ideas which have been incorporated into the
modern ultra-­rapid computing machine. These notions were all
very much in the spirit of the thought of the time, and I do not
for a moment wish to claim anything like the sole responsibil-
ity for their introduction. Nevertheless, they have proved useful,
and it is my hope that my memorandum had some effect in
popularizing them among engineers. At any rate, as we shall see
in the body of the book, they are all ideas which are of interest
in connection with the study of the nervous system.
    This work was thus laid on the table, and, although it has
not proved to be fruitless, it led to no immediate project by Dr.
Rosenblueth and myself. Our actual collaboration resulted from
another project, which was likewise undertaken for the purposes
of the last war. At the beginning of the war, the German prestige
in aviation and the defensive position of England turned the
attention of many scientists to the improvement of anti-­aircraft
artillery. Even before the war, it had become clear that the speed
of the airplane had rendered obsolete all classical methods of


===== PDF PAGE 058 =====

Introduction                                                      9



the direction of fire, and that it was necessary to build into the
control apparatus all the computations necessary. These were
rendered much more difficult by the fact that, unlike all previ-
ously encountered targets, an airplane has a velocity which is a
very appreciable part of the velocity of the missile used to bring
it down. Accordingly, it is exceedingly important to shoot the
missile, not at the target, but in such a way that missile and tar-
get may come together in space at some time in the future. We
must hence find some method of predicting the future position
of the plane.
   The simplest method is to extrapolate the present course of
the plane along a straight line. This has much to recommend
it. The more a plane doubles and curves in flight, the less is its
effective velocity, the less time it has to accomplish a mission,
and the longer it remains in a dangerous region. Other things
being equal, a plane will fly as straight a course as possible. How-
ever, by the time the first shell has burst, other things are not
equal, and the pilot will probably zigzag, stunt, or in some other
way take evasive action.
   If this action were completely at the disposal of the pilot, and
the pilot were to make the sort of intelligent use of his chances
that we anticipate in a good poker player, for example, he has
so much opportunity to modify his expected position before the
arrival of a shell that we should not reckon the chances of hit-
ting him to be very good, except perhaps in the case of a very
wasteful barrage fire. On the other hand, the pilot does not have
a completely free chance to maneuver at his will. For one thing,
he is in a plane going at an exceedingly high speed, and any
too sudden deviation from his course will produce an accelera-
tion that will render him unconscious and may disintegrate the
plane. Then too, he can control the plane only by moving his


===== PDF PAGE 059 =====

10                                                     Introduction



control surfaces, and the new regimen of flow that is established
takes some small time to develop. Even when it is fully devel-
oped, it merely changes the acceleration of the plane, and this
change of acceleration must be converted, first into change of
velocity and then into change of position, before it is finally
effective.
     Moreover, an aviator under the strain of combat conditions
is scarcely in a mood to engage in any very complicated and
untrammeled voluntary behavior, and is quite likely to follow
out the pattern of activity in which he has been trained.
     All this made an investigation of the problem of the curvilin-
ear prediction of flight worth while, whether the results should
prove favorable or unfavorable for the actual use of a control
apparatus involving such curvilinear prediction. To predict the
future of a curve is to carry out a certain operation on its past.
The true prediction operator cannot be realized by any con-
structible apparatus; but there are certain operators which bear
it a certain resemblance and are, in fact, realizable by apparatus
which we can build. I suggested to Professor Samuel Caldwell
of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology that these opera-
tors seemed worth trying, and he immediately suggested that we
try them out on Dr. Bush’s differential analyzer, using this as a
ready-­made model of the desired fire-­control apparatus. We did
so, with results which will be discussed in the body of this book.
At any rate, I found myself engaged in a war project, in which
Mr. Julian H. Bigelow and myself were partners in the investiga-
tion of the theory of prediction and of the construction of appa-
ratus to embody these theories.
     It will be seen that for the second time I had become engaged
in the study of a mechanico-­
                            electrical system which was
designed to usurp a specifically human function—­in the first


===== PDF PAGE 060 =====

Introduction                                                       11



case, the execution of a complicated pattern of computation,
and in the second, the forecasting of the future. In this second
case, we should not avoid the discussion of the performance of
certain human functions. In some fire-­control apparatus, it is
true, the original impulse to point comes in directly by radar,
but in the more usual case, there is a human gun-­pointer or a
gun-­trainer or both coupled into the fire-­control system, and
acting as an essential part of it. It is essential to know their char-
acteristics, in order to incorporate them mathematically into the
machines they control. Moreover, their target, the plane, is also
humanly controlled, and it is desirable to know its performance
characteristics.
   Mr. Bigelow and I came to the conclusion that an extremely
important factor in voluntary activity is what the control engi-
neers term feedback. I shall discuss this in considerable detail in
the appropriate chapters. It is enough to say here that when we
desire a motion to follow a given pattern the difference between
this pattern and the actually performed motion is used as a new
input to cause the part regulated to move in such a way as to
bring its motion closer to that given by the pattern. For example,
one form of steering engine of a ship carries the reading of the
wheel to an offset from the tiller, which so regulates the valves of
the steering engine as to move the tiller in such a way as to turn
these valves off. Thus the tiller turns so as to bring the other end
of the valve-­regulating offset amidships, and in that way regis-
ters the angular position of the wheel as the angular position
of the tiller. Clearly, any friction or other delaying force which
hampers the motion of the tiller will increase the admission of
steam to the valves on one side and will decrease it on the other,
in such a way as to increase the torque tending to bring the tiller
to the desired position. Thus the feedback system tends to make


===== PDF PAGE 061 =====

12                                                      Introduction



the performance of the steering engine relatively independent
of the load.
     On the other hand, under certain conditions of delay, etc.,
a feedback that is too brusque will make the rudder overshoot,
and will be followed by a feedback in the other direction, which
makes the rudder overshoot still more, until the steering mecha-
nism goes into a wild oscillation or hunting, and breaks down
completely. In a book such as that by MacColl,1 we find a very
precise discussion of feedback, the conditions under which it is
advantageous, and the conditions under which it breaks down.
It is a phenomenon which we understand very thoroughly from
a quantitative point of view.
     Now, suppose that I pick up a lead pencil. To do this, I have
to move certain muscles. However, for all of us but a few expert
anatomists, we do not know what these muscles are; and even
among the anatomists, there are few, if any, who can perform
the act by a conscious willing in succession of the contraction of
each muscle concerned. On the contrary, what we will is to pick
the pencil up. Once we have determined on this, our motion pro-
ceeds in such a way that we may say roughly that the amount by
which the pencil is not yet picked up is decreased at each stage.
This part of the action is not in full consciousness.
     To perform an action in such a manner, there must be a report
to the nervous system, conscious or unconscious, of the amount
by which we have failed to pick up the pencil at each instant. If
we have our eye on the pencil, this report may be visual, at least
in part, but it is more generally kinesthetic, or, to use a term
now in vogue, proprioceptive. If the proprioceptive sensations
are wanting and we do not replace them by a visual or other sub-
stitute, we are unable to perform the act of picking up the pen-
cil, and find ourselves in a state of what is known as ataxia. An


===== PDF PAGE 062 =====

Introduction                                                       13



ataxia of this type is familiar in the form of syphilis of the central
nervous system known as tabes dorsalis, where the kinesthetic
sense conveyed by the spinal nerves is more or less destroyed.
   However, an excessive feedback is likely to be as serious a
handicap to organized activity as a defective feedback. In view
of this possibility, Mr. Bigelow and myself approached Dr. Rosen-
blueth with a very specific question. Is there any pathological
condition in which the patient, in trying to perform some vol-
untary act like picking up a pencil, overshoots the mark, and
goes into an uncontrollable oscillation? Dr. Rosenblueth imme-
diately answered us that there is such a well-­known condition,
that it is called purpose tremor, and that it is often associated
with injury to the cerebellum.
   We thus found a most significant confirmation of our hypoth-
esis concerning the nature of at least some voluntary activity. It
will be noted that our point of view considerably transcended
that current among neurophysiologists. The central nervous sys-
tem no longer appears as a self-­contained organ, receiving inputs
from the senses and discharging into the muscles. On the con-
trary, some of its most characteristic activities are explicable only
as circular processes, emerging from the nervous system into the
muscles, and re-­entering the nervous system through the sense
organs, whether they be proprioceptors or organs of the special
senses. This seemed to us to mark a new step in the study of that
part of neurophysiology which concerns not solely the elemen-
tary processes of nerves and synapses but the performance of the
nervous system as an integrated whole.
   The three of us felt that this new point of view merited a
paper, which we wrote up and published.2 Dr. Rosenblueth and
I foresaw that this paper could be only a statement of program
for a large body of experimental work, and we decided that if


===== PDF PAGE 063 =====

14                                                     Introduction



we could ever bring our plan for an interscientific institute to
fruition, this topic would furnish an almost ideal center for our
activity.
     On the communication engineering plane, it had already
become clear to Mr. Bigelow and myself that the problems of
control engineering and of communication engineering were
inseparable, and that they centered not around the technique of
electrical engineering but around the much more fundamental
notion of the message, whether this should be transmitted by
electrical, mechanical, or nervous means. The message is a dis-
crete or continuous sequence of measurable events distributed in
time—­precisely what is called a time series by the statisticians.
The prediction of the future of a message is done by some sort of
operator on its past, whether this operator is realized by a scheme
of mathematical computation, or by a mechanical or electrical
apparatus. In this connection, we found that the ideal prediction
mechanisms which we had at first contemplated were beset by
two types of error, of a roughly antagonistic nature. While the
prediction apparatus which we at first designed could be made
to anticipate an extremely smooth curve to any desired degree of
approximation, this refinement of behavior was always attained
at the cost of an increasing sensitivity. The better the apparatus
was for smooth waves, the more it would be set into oscillation
by small departures from smoothness, and the longer it would be
before such oscillations would die out. Thus the good prediction
of a smooth wave seemed to require a more delicate and sensi-
tive apparatus than the best possible prediction of a rough curve,
and the choice of the particular apparatus to be used in a specific
case was dependent on the statistical nature of the phenomenon
to be predicted. This interacting pair of types of error seemed to
have something in common with the contrasting problems of


===== PDF PAGE 064 =====

Introduction                                                      15



the measure of position and of momentum to be found in the
Heisenberg quantum mechanics, as described according to his
Principle of Uncertainty.
   Once we had clearly grasped that the solution of the problem
of optimum prediction was only to be obtained by an appeal
to the statistics of the time series to be predicted, it was not dif-
ficult to make what had originally seemed to be a difficulty in
the theory of prediction into what was actually an efficient tool
for solving the problem of prediction. Assuming the statistics of
a time series, it became possible to derive an explicit expression
for the mean square error of prediction by a given technique and
for a given lead. Once we had this, we could translate the prob-
lem of optimum prediction to the determination of a specific
operator which should reduce to a minimum a specific positive
quantity dependent on this operator. Minimization problems
of this type belong to a recognized branch of mathematics, the
calculus of variations, and this branch has a recognized tech-
nique. With the aid of this technique, we were able to obtain
an explicit best solution of the problem of predicting the future
of a time series, given its statistical nature, and even further, to
achieve a physical realization of this solution by a constructible
apparatus.
   Once we had done this, at least one problem of engineering
design took on a completely new aspect. In general, engineering
design has been held to be an art rather than a science. By reduc-
ing a problem of this sort to a minimization principle, we had
established the subject on a far more scientific basis. It occurred
to us that this was not an isolated case, but that there was a whole
region of engineering work in which similar design problems
could be solved by the methods of the calculus of variations.


===== PDF PAGE 065 =====

16                                                      Introduction



     We attacked and solved other similar problems by the same
methods. Among these was the problem of the design of wave
filters. We often find a message contaminated by extraneous dis-
turbances which we call background noise. We then face the prob-
lem of restoring the original message, or the message under a
given lead, or the message modified by a given lag, by an opera-
tor applied to the corrupted message. The optimum design of
this operator and of the apparatus by which it is realized depends
on the statistical nature of the message and the noise, singly and
jointly. We thus have replaced in the design of wave filters proc-
esses which were formerly of an empirical and rather haphazard
nature by processes with a thorough scientific justification.
     In doing this, we have made of communication engineering
design a statistical science, a branch of statistical mechanics. The
notion of statistical mechanics has indeed been encroaching on
every branch of science for more than a century. We shall see
that this dominance of statistical mechanics in modern physics
has a very vital significance for the interpretation of the nature
of time. In the case of communication engineering, however,
the significance of the statistical element is immediately appar-
ent. The transmission of information is impossible save as a
transmission of alternatives. If only one contingency is to be
transmitted, then it may be sent most efficiently and with the
least trouble by sending no message at all. The telegraph and
the telephone can perform their function only if the messages
they transmit are continually varied in a manner not completely
determined by their past, and can be designed effectively only if
the variation of these messages conforms to some sort of statisti-
cal regularity.
     To cover this aspect of communication engineering, we had
to develop a statistical theory of the amount of information, in


===== PDF PAGE 066 =====

Introduction                                                      17



which the unit amount of information was that transmitted as
a single decision between equally probable alternatives. This
idea occurred at about the same time to several writers, among
them the statistician R. A. Fisher, Dr. Shannon of the Bell Tele-
phone Laboratories, and the author. Fisher’s motive in study-
ing this subject is to be found in classical statistical theory; that
of Shannon in the problem of coding information; and that of
the author in the problem of noise and message in electrical fil-
ters. Let it be remarked parenthetically that some of my specu-
lations in this direction attach themselves to the earlier work
of Kolmogoroff3 in Russia, although a considerable part of my
work was done before my attention was called to the work of the
Russian school.
   The notion of the amount of information attaches itself very
naturally to a classical notion in statistical mechanics: that of
entropy. Just as the amount of information in a system is a mea-
sure of its degree of organization, so the entropy of a system is a
measure of its degree of disorganization; and the one is simply
the negative of the other. This point of view leads us to a number
of considerations concerning the second law of thermodynam-
ics, and to a study of the possibility of the so-­called Maxwell
demons. Such questions arise independently in the study of
enzymes and other catalysts, and their study is essential for the
proper understanding of such fundamental phenomena of liv-
ing matter as metabolism and reproduction. The third funda-
mental phenomenon of life, that of irritability, belongs to the
domain of communication theory and falls under the group of
ideas we have just been discussing.4
   Thus, as far back as four years ago, the group of scientists
about Dr. Rosenblueth and myself had already become aware
of the essential unity of the set of problems centering about


===== PDF PAGE 067 =====

18                                                     Introduction



communication, control, and statistical mechanics, whether in
the machine or in living tissue. On the other hand, we were seri-
ously hampered by the lack of unity of the literature concerning
these problems, and by the absence of any common terminol-
ogy, or even of a single name for the field. After much consid-
eration, we have come to the conclusion that all the existing
terminology has too heavy a bias to one side or another to serve
the future development of the field as well as it should; and as
happens so often to scientists, we have been forced to coin at
least one artificial neo-­Greek expression to fill the gap. We have
decided to call the entire field of control and communication
theory, whether in the machine or in the animal, by the name
Cybernetics, which we form from the Greek χυβερνήτης or steers-
man. In choosing this term, we wish to recognize that the first
significant paper on feedback mechanisms is an article on gover-
nors, which was published by Clerk Maxwell in 1868,5 and that
governor is derived from a Latin corruption of χυβερνήτης. We also
wish to refer to the fact that the steering engines of a ship are
indeed one of the earliest and best-­developed forms of feedback
mechanisms.
     Although the term cybernetics does not date further back than
the summer of 1947, we shall find it convenient to use in refer-
ring to earlier epochs of the development of the field. From
1942 or thereabouts, the development of the subject went ahead
on several fronts. First, the ideas of the joint paper by Bigelow,
Rosenblueth, and Wiener were disseminated by Dr. Rosenblueth
at a meeting held in New York in 1942, under the auspices of
the Josiah Macy Foundation, and devoted to problems of central
inhibition in the nervous system. Among those present at that
meeting was Dr. Warren McCulloch, of the Medical School of
the University of Illinois, who had already been in touch with


===== PDF PAGE 068 =====

Introduction                                                     19



Dr. Rosenblueth and myself, and who was interested in the study
of the organization of the cortex of the brain.
   At this point there enters an element which occurs repeatedly
in the history of cybernetics—­
                              the influence of mathematical
logic. If I were to choose a patron saint for cybernetics out of the
history of science, I should have to choose Leibniz. The philoso-
phy of Leibniz centers about two closely related concepts—­that
of a universal symbolism and that of a calculus of reasoning.
From these are descended the mathematical notation and the
symbolic logic of the present day. Now, just as the calculus of
arithmetic lends itself to a mechanization progressing through
the abacus and the desk computing machine to the ultra-­rapid
computing machines of the present day, so the calculus ratioci-
nator of Leibniz contains the germs of the machina ratiocinatrix,
the reasoning machine. Indeed, Leibniz himself, like his prede-
cessor Pascal, was interested in the construction of computing
machines in the metal. It is therefore not in the least surprising
that the same intellectual impulse which has led to the develop-
ment of mathematical logic has at the same time led to the ideal
or actual mechanization of processes of thought.
   A mathematical proof which we can follow is one which can
be written in a finite number of symbols. These symbols, in fact,
may make an appeal to the notion of infinity, but this appeal
is one which we can sum up in a finite number of stages, as in
the case of mathematical induction, where we prove a theorem
depending on a parameter n for n = 0, and also prove that the
case n + l follows from the case n, thus establishing the theo-
rem for all positive values of n. Moreover, the rules of operation
of our deductive mechanism must be finite in number, even
though they may appear to be otherwise, through a reference to
the concept of infinity, which can itself be stated in finite terms.


===== PDF PAGE 069 =====

20                                                      Introduction



In short, it has become quite evident, both to the nominalists
like Hilbert and to the intuitionists like Weyl, that the develop-
ment of a mathematico-­logical theory is subject to the same sort
of restrictions as those that limit the performance of a comput-
ing machine. As we shall see later, it is even possible to interpret
in this way the paradoxes of Cantor and of Russell.
     I am myself a former student of Russell and owe much to his
influence. Dr. Shannon took for his doctor’s thesis at the Mas-
sachusetts Institute of Technology the application of the tech-
niques of the classical Boolean algebra of classes to the study of
switching systems in electrical engineering. Turing, who is per-
haps first among those who have studied the logical possibilities
of the machine as an intellectual experiment, served the Brit-
ish government during the war as a worker in electronics, and
is now in charge of the program which the National Physical
Laboratory at Teddington has undertaken for the development
of computing machines of the modern type.
     Another young migrant from the field of mathematical logic
to cybernetics is Walter Pitts. He had been a student of Carnap at
Chicago and had also been in contact with Professor Rashevsky
and his school of biophysicists. Let it be remarked in passing
that this group has contributed much to directing the attention
of the mathematically minded to the possibilities of the biologi-
cal sciences, although it may seem to some of us that they are
too dominated by problems of energy and potential and the
methods of classical physics to do the best possible work in the
study of systems like the nervous system, which are very far from
being closed energetically.
     Mr. Pitts had the good fortune to fall under McCulloch’s
influence, and the two began to work quite early on problems
concerning the union of nerve fibers by synapses into systems


===== PDF PAGE 070 =====

Introduction                                                    21



with given over­all properties. Independently of Shannon, they
had used the technique of mathematical logic for the discussion
of what were after all switching problems. They added elements
which were not prominent in Shannon’s earlier work, although
they are certainly suggested by the ideas of Turing: the use of the
time as a parameter, the consideration of nets containing cycles,
and of synaptic and other delays.6
   In the summer of 1943, I met Dr. J. Lettvin of the Boston
City Hospital, who was very much interested in matters con-
cerning nervous mechanisms. He was a close friend of Mr. Pitts,
and made me acquainted with his work.7 He induced Mr. Pitts
to come out to Boston, and to make the acquaintance of Dr.
Rosenblueth and myself. We welcomed him into our group. Mr.
Pitts came to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the
autumn of 1943, in order to work with me and to strengthen
his mathematical background for the study of the new science
of cybernetics, which had by that time been fairly born but not
yet christened.
   At that time Mr. Pitts was already thoroughly acquainted with
mathematical logic and neurophysiology, but had not had the
chance to make very many engineering contacts. In particular,
he was not acquainted with Dr. Shannon’s work, and he had not
had much experience of the possibilities of electronics. He was
very much interested when I showed him examples of modern
vacuum tubes and explained to him that these were ideal means
for realizing in the metal the equivalents of his neuronic circuits
and systems. From that time, it became clear to us that the ultra-­
rapid computing machine, depending as it does on consecutive
switching devices, must represent almost an ideal model of the
problems arising in the nervous system. The all-­or-­none charac-
ter of the discharge of the neurons is precisely analogous to the


===== PDF PAGE 071 =====

22                                                     Introduction



single choice made in determining a digit on the binary scale,
which more than one of us had already contemplated as the
most satisfactory basis of computing-­machine design. The syn-
apse is nothing but a mechanism for determining whether a cer-
tain combination of outputs from other selected elements will or
will not act as an adequate stimulus for the discharge of the next
element, and must have its precise analogue in the computing
machine. The problem of interpreting the nature and varieties
of memory in the animal has its parallel in the problem of con-
structing artificial memories for the machine.
     At this time, the construction of computing machines had
proved to be more essential for the war effort than the first opin-
ion of Dr. Bush might have indicated, and was progressing at sev-
eral centers along lines not too different from those which my
earlier report had indicated. Harvard, Aberdeen Proving Ground,
and the University of Pennsylvania were already constructing
machines, and the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton
and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology were soon to
enter the same field. In this program there was a gradual progress
from the mechanical assembly to the electrical assembly, from
the scale of ten to the scale of two, from the mechanical relay
to the electrical relay, from humanly directed operation to auto-
matically directed operation; and in short, each new machine
more than the last was in conformity with the memorandum I
had sent Dr. Bush. There was a continual going and coming of
those interested in these fields. We had an opportunity to com-
municate our ideas to our colleagues, in particular to Dr. Aiken
of Harvard, Dr. von Neumann of the Institute for Advanced
Study, and Dr. Goldstine of the Eniac and Edvac machines at the
University of Pennsylvania. Everywhere we met with a sympa-
thetic hearing, and the vocabulary of the engineers soon became


===== PDF PAGE 072 =====

Introduction                                                     23



contaminated with the terms of the neurophysiologist and the
psychologist.
   At this stage of the proceedings, Dr. von Neumann and myself
felt it desirable to hold a joint meeting of all those interested in
what we now call cybernetics, and this meeting took place at
Princeton in the late winter of 1943–­1944. Engineers, physiolo-
gists, and mathematicians were all represented. It was impossible
to have Dr. Rosenblueth among us, as he had just accepted an
invitation to act as Head of the laboratories of physiology of the
Instituto Nacional de Cardiología in Mexico, but Dr. McCulloch
and Dr. Lorente de Nó of the Rockefeller Institute represented
the physiologists. Dr. Aiken was unable to be present; however,
Dr. Goldstine was one of a group of several computing-­machine
designers who participated in the meeting, while Dr. von Neu-
mann, Mr. Pitts, and myself were the mathematicians. The phys-
iologists gave a joint presentation of cybernetic problems from
their point of view; similarly, the computing-­machine designers
presented their methods and objectives. At the end of the meet-
ing, it had become clear to all that there was a substantial com-
mon basis of ideas between the workers in the different fields,
that people in each group could already use notions which had
been better developed by the others, and that some attempt
should be made to achieve a common vocabulary.
   A considerable period before this, the war research group con-
ducted by Dr. Warren Weaver had published a document, first
secret and later restricted, covering the work of Mr. Bigelow and
myself on predictors and wave filters. It was found that the con-
ditions of anti-­aircraft fire did not justify the design of special
apparatus for curvilinear prediction, but the principles proved to
be sound and practical, and have been used by the government
for smoothing purposes, and in several fields of related work. In


===== PDF PAGE 073 =====

24                                                     Introduction



particular, the type of integral equation to which the calculus of
variations problem reduces itself has been shown to emerge in
wave-­guide problems and in many other problems of an applied
mathematical interest. Thus in one way or another, the end of
the war saw the ideas of prediction theory and of the statisti-
cal approach to communication engineering already familiar to
a large part of the statisticians and communication engineers
of the United States and Great Britain. It also saw my govern-
ment document, now out of print, and a considerable number
of expository papers by Levinson,8 Wallman, Daniell, Phillips,
and others written to fill the gap. I myself have had a long math-
ematical expository paper underway for several years to put the
work I have done on permanent record, but circumstances not
completely under my control have prevented its prompt publica-
tion. Finally, after a joint meeting at the American Mathematical
Society and the Institute of Mathematical Statistics held in New
York in the spring of 1947, and devoted to the study of stochas-
tic processes from a point of view closely allied to cybernetics, I
have passed on what I have already written of my manuscript to
Professor Doob of the University of Illinois, to be developed in
his notation and according to his ideas as a book for the Math-
ematical Surveys series of the American Mathematical Society. I
had already developed part of my work in a course of lectures in
the mathematics department of M.I.T. in the summer of 1945.
Since then, my old student and collaborator,9 Dr. Y. W. Lee, has
returned from China. He is giving a course on the new methods
for the design of wave filters and similar apparatus in the M.I.T.
electrical engineering department in the fall of 1947, and has
plans to work the material of these lectures up into a book. At
the same time, the out-­of-­print government document is to be
reprinted.10


===== PDF PAGE 074 =====

Introduction                                                     25



   As I have said, Dr. Rosenblueth returned to Mexico about the
beginning of 1944. In the spring of 1945, I received an invita-
tion from the Mexican Mathematical Society to participate in
a meeting to be held in Guadalajara that June. This invitation
was reinforced by the Comision Instigadora y Coordinadora de
la Investigación Cientifica, under the leadership of Dr. Manuel
Sandoval Vallarta, of whom I have already spoken. Dr. Rosen-
blueth invited me to share some scientific research with him,
and the Instituto Nacional de Cardiología, under its director Dr.
Ignacio Chávez, extended me its hospitality.
   I stayed some ten weeks in Mexico at that time. Dr. Rosen-
blueth and I decided to continue a line of work which we had
already discussed with Dr. Walter B. Cannon, who was also with
Dr. Rosenblueth, on a visit which unfortunately proved to be his
last. This work had to do with the relation between, on the one
hand, the tonic, clonic, and phasic contractions in epilepsy and,
on the other hand, the tonic spasm, beat, and fibrillation of the
heart. We felt that heart muscle represented an irritable tissue as
useful for the investigation of conduction mechanisms as nerve
tissue, and furthermore, that the anastomoses and decussations
of the heart-­muscle fibers presented us with a simpler phenom-
enon than the problem of the nervous synapse. We were also
deeply grateful to Dr. Chávez for his unquestioning hospitality,
and, while it has never been the policy of the Instituto to restrict
Dr. Rosenblueth to the investigation of the heart, we were
grateful to have an opportunity to contribute to its principal
purpose.
   Our investigation took two directions: the study of phenom-
ena of conductivity and latency in uniform conducting media
of two or more dimensions, and the statistical study of the con-
ducting properties of random nets of conducting fibers. The first


===== PDF PAGE 075 =====

26                                                      Introduction



led us to the rudiments of a theory of heart flutter, the latter to a
certain possible understanding of fibrillation. Both lines of work
were developed in a paper,11 published by us, and, although in
both cases our earlier results have shown the need of a consider-
able amount of revision and of supplementation, the work on
flutter is being revised by Mr. Oliver G. Selfridge of the Massa-
chusetts Institute of Technology, while the statistical technique
used in the study of heart-­muscle nets has been extended to the
treatment of neuronal nets by Mr. Walter Pitts, now a Fellow
of the John Simon Guggenheim Foundation. The experimental
work is being carried on by Dr. Rosenblueth with the aid of Dr.
F. Garcia Ramos of the Instituto Nacional de Cardiología and the
Mexican Army Medical School.
     At the Guadalajara meeting of the Mexican Mathematical
Society, Dr. Rosenblueth and I presented some of our results.
We had already come to the conclusion that our earlier plans
of collaboration had shown themselves to be practicable. We
were fortunate enough to have a chance to present our results
to a larger audience. In the spring of 1946, Dr. McCulloch had
made arrangements with the Josiah Macy Foundation for the
first of a series of meetings to be held in New York and to be
devoted to the problems of feedback. These meetings have been
conducted in the traditional Macy way, worked out most effi-
ciently by Dr. Frank Fremont-­Smith, who organized them on
behalf of the Foundation. The idea has been to get together a
group of modest size, not exceeding some twenty in number, of
workers in various related fields, and to hold them together for
two successive days in all-­day series of informal papers, discus-
sions, and meals together, until they had had the opportunity
to thresh out their differences and to make progress in thinking
along the same lines. The nucleus of our meetings has been the


===== PDF PAGE 076 =====

Introduction                                                      27



group that had assembled in Princeton in 1944, but Drs. McCull-
och and Fremont-­
                Smith have rightly seen the psychological
and sociological implications of the subject, and have co-­opted
into the group a number of leading psychologists, sociologists,
and anthropologists. The need of including psychologists had
indeed been obvious from the beginning. He who studies the
nervous system cannot forget the mind, and he who studies the
mind cannot forget the nervous system. Much of the psychology
of the past has proved to be really nothing more than the physi-
ology of the organs of special sense; and the whole weight of
the body of ideas which cybernetics is introducing into psychol-
ogy concerns the physiology and anatomy of the highly special-
ized cortical areas connecting with these organs of special sense.
From the beginning, we have anticipated that the problem of
the perception of Gestalt, or of the perceptual formation of uni-
versals, would prove to be of this nature. What is the mechanism
by which we recognize a square as a square, irrespective of its
position, its size, and its orientation? To assist us in such matters
and to inform them of whatever use might be made of our con-
cepts for their assistance, we had among us such psychologists
as Professor Klüver of the University of Chicago, the late Dr. Kurt
Lewin of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Dr. M.
Ericsson of New York.
   As to sociology and anthropology, it is manifest that the
importance of information and communication as mechanisms
of organization proceeds beyond the individual into the commu-
nity. On the one hand, it is completely impossible to understand
social communities such as those of ants without a, thorough
investigation of their means of communication, and we were
fortunate enough to have the aid of Dr. Schneirla in this mat-
ter. For the similar problems of human organization, we sought


===== PDF PAGE 077 =====

28                                                     Introduction



help from the anthropologists Drs. Bateson and Margaret Mead;
while Dr. Morgenstern of the Institute for Advanced Study was
our adviser in the significant field of social organization belong-
ing to economic theory. His very important joint book on games
with Dr. von Neumann, by the way, represents a most interest-
ing study of social organization from the point of view of meth-
ods closely related to, although distinct from, the subject matter
of cybernetics. Dr. Lewin and others represented the newer work
on the theory of opinion sampling and the practice of opinion
making, and Dr. F. C. S. Northrup was interested in assaying the
philosophical significance of our work.
     This does not purport to be a complete list of our group. We
also enlarged the group to contain more engineers and math-
ematicians such as Bigelow and Savage, more neuroanatomists
and neurophysiologists such as von Bonin and Lloyd, and so on.
Our first meeting, held in the spring of 1946, was largely devoted
to didactic papers by those of us who had been present at the
Princeton meeting and to a general assessment of the impor-
tance of the field by all present. It was the sense of the meeting
that the ideas behind cybernetics were sufficiently important
and interesting to those present to warrant a continuation of
our meetings at intervals of six months; and that before the next
full meeting, we should have a small meeting for the benefit of
the less mathematically trained to explain to them in as simple
language as possible the nature of the mathematical concepts
involved.
     In the summer of 1946, I returned to Mexico with the support
of the Rockefeller Foundation and the hospitality of the Instituto
Nacional de Cardiología to continue the collaboration between
Dr. Rosenblueth and myself. This time we decided to take a
nervous problem directly from the topic of feedback and to see


===== PDF PAGE 078 =====

Introduction                                                       29



what we could do with it experimentally. We chose the cat as our
experimental animal, and the quadriceps extensor femoris as the
muscle to study. We cut the attachment of the muscle, fixed it to
a lever under known tension, and recorded its contractions iso-
metrically or isotonically. We also used an oscillograph to record
the simultaneous electrical changes in the muscle itself. We
worked chiefly with cats, first decerebrated under ether anesthe-
sia and later made spinal by a thoracic transection of the cord. In
many cases, strychnine was used to increase the reflex responses.
The muscle was loaded to the point where a tap would set it
into a periodic pattern of contraction, which is called clonus in
the language of the physiologist. We observed this pattern of
contraction, paying attention to the physiological condition of
the cat, the load on the muscle, the frequency of oscillation, the
base level of the oscillation, and its amplitude. These we tried
to analyze as we should analyze a mechanical or electrical sys-
tem exhibiting the same pattern of hunting. We employed, for
example, the methods of MacColl’s book on servomechanisms.
This is not the place to discuss the full significance of our results,
which we are now repeating and preparing to write up for publi-
cation. However, the following statements are either established
or very probable: that the frequency of clonic oscillation is much
less sensitive to changes of the loading conditions than we had
expected, and that it is much more nearly determined by the
constants of the closed arc (efferent-­nerve)–­muscle–­(kinesthetic-­
end-­body)–­(afferent-­nerve)–­(central-­synapse)–­(efferent-­nerve)
than by anything else. This circuit is not even approximately
a circuit of linear operators if we take as our base of linearity
the number of impulses transmitted by the efferent nerve per
second, but seems to become much more nearly so if we replace
the number of impulses by its logarithm. This corresponds to


===== PDF PAGE 079 =====

30                                                     Introduction



the fact that the form of the envelope of stimulation of the effer-
ent nerve is not nearly sinusoidal, but that the logarithm of this
curve is much more nearly sinusoidal; while in a linear oscillat-
ing system with constant energy level, the form of the curve of
stimulation must be sinusoidal in all except a set of cases of zero
probability. Again, the notions of facilitation and inhibition are
much more nearly multiplicative than additive in nature. For
example, a complete inhibition means a multiplication by zero,
and a partial inhibition means a multiplication by a small quan-
tity. It is these notions of inhibition and facilitation which have
been used12 in the discussion of the reflex arc. Furthermore, the
synapse is a coincidence-­recorder, and the outgoing fiber is stim-
ulated only if the number of incoming impulses in a small sum-
mation time exceeds a certain threshold. If this threshold is low
enough in comparison with the full number of incoming syn-
apses, the synaptic mechanism serves to multiply probabilities,
and that it can be even an approximately linear link is possible
only in a logarithmic system. This approximate logarithmicity
of the synapse mechanism is certainly allied to the approximate
logarithmicity of the Weber-­Fechner law of sensation intensity,
even though this law is only a first approximation.
     The most striking point is that on this logarithmic basis, and
with data obtained from the conduction of single pulses through
the various elements of the neuromuscular arc, we were able to
obtain very fair approximations to the actual periods of clonic
vibration, using the technique already developed by the servo
engineers for the determination of the frequencies of hunting
oscillations in feedback systems which have broken down. We
obtained theoretical oscillations of about 13.9 per second, in
cases where the observed oscillations varied between frequen-
cies of 7 and 30, but generally remained within a range varying


===== PDF PAGE 080 =====

Introduction                                                    31



somewhere between 12 and 17. Under the circumstances, this
agreement is excellent.
   The frequency of clonus is not the only important phenome-
non which we may observe: there is also a relatively slow change
in basal tension, and an even slower change in amplitude. These
phenomena are certainly by no means linear. However, suf-
ficiently slow changes in the constants of a linear oscillating
system may be treated to a first approximation as though they
were infinitely slow, and as though over each part of the oscilla-
tion the system behaved as it would if its parameters were those
belonging to it at the time. This is the method known in other
branches of physics as that of secular perturbations. It may be
used to study the problems of base level and amplitude of clo-
nus. While this work has not yet been completed, it is clear that
it is both possible and promising. There is a strong suggestion
that though the timing of the main arc in clonus proves it to
be a two-­neuron arc, the amplification of impulses in this arc is
variable in one and perhaps in more points, and that some part
of this amplification may be affected by slow, multineuron proc-
esses which run much higher in the central nervous system than
the spinal chain primarily responsible for the timing of clonus.
This variable amplification may be affected by the general level
of central activity, by the use of strychnine or of anesthetics, by
decerebration, and by many other causes.
   These were the main results presented by Dr. Rosenblueth and
myself at the Macy meeting held in the autumn of 1946, and
in a meeting of the New York Academy of Sciences held at the
same time for the purpose of diffusing the notions of cybernet-
ics over a larger public. While we were pleased with our results,
and fully convinced of the general practicability of work in this
direction, we felt nevertheless that the time of our collaboration


===== PDF PAGE 081 =====

32                                                     Introduction



had been too brief, and that our work had been done under too
much pressure to make it desirable to publish without further
experimental confirmation. This confirmation—­
                                             which natu-
rally might amount to a refutation—­we are now seeking in the
summer and autumn of 1947.
     The Rockefeller Foundation had already given Dr. Rosenblu-
eth a grant for the equipment of a new laboratory building at
the Instituto Nacional de Cardiología. We felt that the time was
now ripe for us to go jointly to them—­that is, to Dr. Warren
Weaver, in charge of the department of physical sciences, and
to Dr. Robert Morison, in charge of the department of medical
sciences—­to establish the basis of a long-­time scientific collab-
oration, in order to carry on our program at a more leisurely
and healthy pace. In this we were enthusiastically backed by our
respective institutions. Dr. George Harrison, Dean of Science,
was the chief representative of the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology during these negotiations, while Dr. Ignacio Chávez
spoke for his institution, the Instituto Nacional de Cardiología.
During the negotiations, it became clear that the laboratory cen-
ter of the joint activity should be at the Instituto, both in order
to avoid the duplication of laboratory equipment and to fur-
ther the very real interest the Rockefeller Foundation has shown
in the establishment of scientific centers in Latin America. The
plan finally adopted was for five years, during which I should
spend six months of every other year at the Instituto, while Dr.
Rosenblueth would spend six months of the intervening years
at the Institute. The time at the Instituto is to be devoted to
the obtaining and elucidation of experimental data pertaining
to cybernetics, while the intermediate years are to be devoted
to more theoretical research and, above all, to the very difficult
problem of devising, for people wishing to go into this new


===== PDF PAGE 082 =====

Introduction                                                   33



field, a scheme of training which will secure for them both the
necessary mathematical, physical, and engineering background
and the proper acquaintance with biological, psychological, and
medical techniques.
   In the spring of 1947, Dr. McCulloch and Mr. Pitts did a piece
of work of considerable cybernetic importance. Dr. McCulloch
had been given the problem of designing an apparatus to enable
the blind to read the printed page by ear. The production of vari-
able tones by type through the agency of a photocell is an old
story, and can be effected by any number of methods; the dif-
ficult point is to make the pattern of the sound substantially
the same when the pattern of the letters is given, whatever the
size. This is a definite analogue of the problem of the perception
of form, of Gestalt, which allows us to recognize a square as a
square through a large number of changes of size and of orienta-
tion. Dr. McCulloch’s device involved a selective reading of the
type imprint for a set of different magnifications. Such a selec-
tive reading can be performed automatically as a scanning pro-
cess. This scanning, to allow a comparison between a figure and
a given standard figure of fixed but different size, was a device
which I had already suggested at one of the Macy meetings. A
diagram of the apparatus by which the selective reading was
done came to the attention of Dr. von Bonin, who immediately
asked, “Is this a diagram of the fourth layer of the visual cortex
of the brain?” Acting on this suggestion, Dr. McCulloch, with
the assistance of Mr. Pitts, produced a theory tying up the anat-
omy and the physiology of the visual cortex, and in this theory
the operation of scanning over a set of transformations plays an
important part. This was presented in the spring of 1947, both
at the Macy meeting and at a meeting of the New York Acad-
emy of Sciences. Finally, this scanning process involves a certain


===== PDF PAGE 083 =====

34                                                        Introduction



periodic time, which corresponds to what we call the “time of
sweep” in ordinary television. There are various anatomic clues
to this time in the length of the chain of consecutive synapses
necessary to run around one cycle of performance. These yield
a time of the order of a tenth of a second for a complete perfor-
mance of the cycle of operations, and this is the approximate
period of the so-­called “alpha rhythm” of the brain. Finally, the
alpha rhythm, on quite other evidence, has already been conjec-
tured to be of visual origin and to be important in the process of
form perception.
     In the spring of 1947, I received an invitation to participate in
a mathematical conference in Nancy on problems arising from
harmonic analysis. I accepted and, on my voyage there and back,
spent a total of three weeks in England, chiefly as a guest of my
old friend Professor J. B. S. Haldane. I had an excellent chance
to meet most of those doing work on ultra-­rapid computing
machines, especially at Manchester and at the National Physical
Laboratories at Teddington, and above all to talk over the fun-
damental ideas of cybernetics with Mr. Turing at Teddington.
I also visited the Psychological Laboratory at Cambridge, and
had a very good chance to discuss the work that Professor F. C.
Bartlett and his staff were doing on the human element in con-
trol processes involving such an element. I found the interest in
cybernetics about as great and well informed in England as in
the United States, and the engineering work excellent, though
of course limited by the smaller funds available. I found much
interest and understanding of its possibility in many quarters,
and Professors Haldane, H. Levy, and Bernal certainly regarded
it as one of the most urgent problems on the agenda of science
and scientific philosophy. I did not find, however, that as much
progress had been made in unifying the subject and in pulling


===== PDF PAGE 084 =====

Introduction                                                       35



the various threads of research together as we had made at home
in the States.
   In France, the meeting at Nancy on harmonic analysis con-
tained a number of papers uniting statistical ideas and ideas from
communication engineering in a manner wholly in conformity
with the point of view of cybernetics. Here I must mention espe-
cially the names of M. Blanc-­Lapierre and M. Loève. I found also
a considerable interest in the subject on the part of mathema-
ticians, physiologists, and physical chemists, particularly with
regard to its thermodynamic aspects in so far as they touch the
more general problem of the nature of life itself. Indeed, I had
discussed that subject in Boston, before my departure, with Pro-
fessor Szent-­Györgyi, the Hungarian biochemist, and had found
his ideas concordant with my own.
   One event during my French visit is particularly worthwhile
noting here. My colleague, Professor G. de Santillana of M.I.T.,
introduced me to M. Freymann, of the firm of Hermann et Cie,
and he requested of me the present book. I am particularly glad
to receive his invitation, as M. Freymann is a Mexican, and the
writing of the present book, as well as a good deal of the research
leading up to it, has been done in Mexico.
   As I have already hinted, one of the directions of work which
the realm of ideas of the Macy meetings has suggested concerns
the importance of the notion and the technique of communica-
tion in the social system. It is certainly true that the social system
is an organization like the individual, that it is bound together
by a system of communication, and that it has a dynamics in
which circular processes of a feedback nature play an important
part. This is true, both in the general fields of anthropology and
of sociology and in the more specific field of economics; and
the very important work, which we have already mentioned, of


===== PDF PAGE 085 =====

36                                                      Introduction



von Neumann and Morgenstern on the theory of games enters
into this range of ideas. On this basis, Drs. Gregory Bateson and
Margaret Mead have urged me, in view of the intensely pressing
nature of the sociological and economic problems of the present
age of confusion, to devote a large part of my energies to the
discussion of this side of cybernetics.
     Much as I sympathize with their sense of the urgency of the
situation, and much as I hope that they and other competent
workers will take up problems of this sort, which I shall discuss
in a later chapter of this book, I can share neither their feeling
that this field has the first claim on my attention, nor their hope-
fulness that sufficient progress can be registered in this direction
to have an appreciable therapeutic effect in the present diseases
of society. To begin with, the main quantities affecting society
are not only statistical, but the runs of statistics on which they
are based are excessively short. There is no great use in lump-
ing under one head the economics of steel industry before and
after the introduction of the Bessemer process, nor in compar-
ing the statistics of rubber production before and after the bur-
geoning of the automobile industry and the cultivation of Hevea
in Malaya. Neither is there any important point in running
statistics of the incidence of venereal disease in a single table
which covers both the period before and that after the intro-
duction of salvarsan, unless for the specific purpose of studying
the effectiveness of this drug. For a good statistic of society, we
need long runs under essentially constant conditions, just as for a
good resolution of light we need a lens with a large aperture. The
effective aperture of a lens is not appreciably increased by aug-
menting its nominal aperture, unless the lens is made of a material
so homogeneous that the delay of light in different parts of the lens
conforms to the proper designed amount by less than a small part of


===== PDF PAGE 086 =====

Introduction                                                        37



a wavelength. Similarly, the advantage of long runs of statistics under
widely varying conditions is specious and spurious. Thus the human
sciences are very poor testing-­grounds for a new mathematical
technique: as poor as the statistical mechanics of a gas would be
to a being of the order of size of a molecule, to whom the fluc-
tuations which we ignore from a larger standpoint would be pre-
cisely the matters of greatest interest. Moreover, in the absence
of reasonably safe routine numerical techniques, the element of
the judgment of the expert in determining the estimates to be
made of sociological, anthropological, and economic quantities
is so great that it is no field for a newcomer who has not yet
had the bulk of experience which goes to make up the expert.
I may remark parenthetically that the modern apparatus of the
theory of small samples, once it goes beyond the determination
of its own specially defined parameters and becomes a method
for positive statistical inference in new cases, does not inspire
me with any confidence unless it is applied by a statistician by
whom the main elements of the dynamics of the situation are
either explicitly known or implicitly felt.
   I have just spoken of a field in which my expectations of
cybernetics are definitely tempered by an understanding of the
limitations of the data which we may hope to obtain. There are
two other fields where I ultimately hope to accomplish some-
thing practical with the aid of cybernetic ideas, but in which this
hope must wait on further developments. One of these is the
matter of prostheses for lost or paralyzed limbs. As we have seen
in the discussion of Gestalt, the ideas of communication engi-
neering have already been applied by McCulloch to the prob-
lem of the replacement of lost senses, in the construction of an
instrument to enable the blind to read print by hearing. Here the
instrument suggested by McCulloch takes over quite explicitly


===== PDF PAGE 087 =====

38                                                       Introduction



some of the functions not only of the eye but of the visual cor-
tex. There is a manifest possibility of doing something similar in
the case of artificial limbs. The loss of a segment of limb implies
not only the loss of the purely passive support of the missing
segment or its value as mechanical extension of the stump, and
the loss of the contractile power of its muscles, but implies as
well the loss of all cutaneous and kinesthetic sensations originat-
ing in it. The first two losses are what the artificial-­limbmaker
now tries to replace. The third has so far been beyond his scope.
In the case of a simple peg leg, this is not important: the rod that
replaces the missing limb has no degrees of freedom of its own,
and the kinesthetic mechanism of the stump is fully adequate to
report its own position and velocity. This is not the case with the
articulated limb with a mobile knee and ankle, thrown ahead by
the patient with the aid of his remaining musculature. He has
no adequate report of their position and motion, and this inter-
feres with his sureness of step on an irregular terrain. There does
not seem to be any insuperable difficulty in equipping the arti-
ficial joints and the sole of the artificial foot with strain or pres-
sure gauges, which are to register electrically or otherwise, say
through vibrators, on intact areas of skin. The present artificial
limb removes some of the paralysis caused by the amputation
but leaves the ataxis. With the use of proper receptors, much of
this ataxia should disappear as well, and the patient should be
able to learn reflexes, such as those we all use in driving a car,
which should enable him to step out with a much surer gait.
What we have said about the leg should apply with even more
force to the arm, where the figure of the manikin familiar to all
readers of books of neurology shows that the sensory loss in an
amputation of the thumb alone is considerably greater than the
sensory loss even in a hip-­joint amputation.


===== PDF PAGE 088 =====

Introduction                                                     39



   I have made an attempt to report these considerations to the
proper authorities, but up to now I have not been able to accom-
plish much. I do not know whether the same ideas have already
emanated from other sources, nor whether they have been tried
out and found technically impracticable. In case they have not
yet received a thorough practical consideration, they should
receive one in the immediate future.
   Let me now come to another point which I believe to merit
attention. It has long been clear to me that the modern ultra-­
rapid computing machine was in principle an ideal central ner-
vous system to an apparatus for automatic control; and that
its input and output need not be in the form of numbers or
diagrams but might very well be, respectively, the readings of
artificial sense organs, such as photoelectric cells or thermom-
eters, and the performance of motors or solenoids. With the aid
of strain gauges or similar agencies to read the performance of
these motor organs and to report, to “feed back,” to the central
control system as an artificial kinesthetic sense, we are already in
a position to construct artificial machines of almost any degree
of elaborateness of performance. Long before Nagasaki and the
public awareness of the atomic bomb, it had occurred to me that
we were here in the presence of another social potentiality of
unheard-­of importance for good and for evil. The automatic fac-
tory and the assembly line without human agents are only so
far ahead of us as is limited by our willingness to put such a
degree of effort into their engineering as was spent, for exam-
ple, in the development of the technique of radar in the Second
World War.13
   I have said that this new development has unbounded pos-
sibilities for good and for evil. For one thing, it makes the meta-
phorical dominance of the machines, as imagined by Samuel


===== PDF PAGE 089 =====

40                                                     Introduction



Butler, a most immediate and non-­
                                 metaphorical problem. It
gives the human race a new and most effective collection of
mechanical slaves to perform its labor. Such mechanical labor
has most of the economic properties of slave labor, although,
unlike slave labor, it does not involve the direct demoralizing
effects of human cruelty. However, any labor that accepts the
conditions of competition with slave labor accepts the condi-
tions of slave labor, and is essentially slave labor. The key word
of this statement is competition. It may very well be a good thing
for humanity to have the machine remove from it the need of
menial and disagreeable tasks, or it may not. I do not know. It
cannot be good for these new potentialities to be assessed in the
terms of the market, of the money they save; and it is precisely
the terms of the open market, the “fifth freedom,” that have
become the shibboleth of the sector of American opinion rep-
resented by the National Association of Manufacturers and the
Saturday Evening Post. I say American opinion, for as an Ameri-
can, I know it best, but the hucksters recognize no national
boundary.
     Perhaps I may clarify the historical background of the present
situation if I say that the first industrial revolution, the revo-
lution of the “dark satanic mills,” was the devaluation of the
human arm by the competition of machinery. There is no rate
of pay at which a United States pick-­and-­shovel laborer can live
which is low enough to compete with the work of a steam shovel
as an excavator. The modern industrial revolution is similarly
bound to devalue the human brain, at least in its simpler and
more routine decisions. Of course, just as the skilled carpenter,
the skilled mechanic, the skilled dressmaker have in some degree
survived the first industrial revolution, so the skilled scientist
and the skilled administrator may survive the second. However,


===== PDF PAGE 090 =====

Introduction                                                    41



taking the second revolution as accomplished, the average
human being of mediocre attainments or less has nothing to sell
that it is worth anyone’s money to buy.
   The answer, of course, is to have a society based on human
values other than buying or selling. To arrive at this society,
we need a good deal of planning and a good deal of struggle,
which, if the best comes to the best, may be on the plane of
ideas, and otherwise—­who knows? I thus felt it my duty to pass
on my information and understanding of the position to those
who have an active interest in the conditions and the future of
labor, that is, to the labor unions. I did manage to make contact
with one or two persons high up in the C.I.O., and from them
I received a very intelligent and sympathetic hearing. Further
than these individuals, neither I nor any of them was able to
go. It was their opinion, as it had been my previous observation
and information, both in the United States and in England, that
the labor unions and the labor movement are in the hands of
a highly limited personnel, thoroughly well trained in the spe-
cialized problems of shop stewardship and disputes concerning
wages and conditions of work, and totally unprepared to enter
into the larger political, technical, sociological, and economic
questiqns which concern the very existence of labor. The reasons
for this are easy enough to see: the labor union official generally
comes from the exacting life of a workman into the exacting life
of an administrator without any opportunity for a broader train-
ing; and for those who have this training, a union career is not
generally inviting; nor, quite naturally, are the unions receptive
to such people.
   Those of us who have contributed to the new science of cyber-
netics thus stand in a moral position which is, to say the least,
not very comfortable. We have contributed to the initiation of a


===== PDF PAGE 091 =====

42                                                      Introduction



new science which, as I have said, embraces technical develop-
ments with great possibilities for good and for evil. We can only
hand it over into the world that exists about us, and this is the
world of Belsen and Hiroshima. We do not even have the choice
of suppressing these new technical developments. They belong
to the age, and the most any of us can do by suppression is to
put the development of the subject into the hands of the most
irresponsible and most venal of our engineers. The best we can
do is to see that a large public understands the trend and the
bearing of the present work, and to confine our personal efforts
to those fields, such as physiology and psychology, most remote
from war and exploitation. As we have seen, there are those who
hope that the good of a better understanding of man and soci-
ety which is offered by this new field of work may anticipate
and outweigh the incidental contribution we are making to the
concentration of power (which is always concentrated, by its
very conditions of existence, in the hands of the most unscrupu-
lous). I write in 1947, and I am compelled to say that it is a very
slight hope.
     The author wishes to express his gratitude to Mr. Walter Pitts,
Mr. Oliver Selfridge, Mr. Georges Dubé, and Mr. Frederic Webster
for aid in correcting the manuscript and preparing the material
for publication.


                                Instituto Nacional de Cardiología,


                                                 Ciudad de México
                                                  November, 1947


===== PDF PAGE 092 =====

I Newtonian and Bergsonian Time




There is a little hymn or song familiar to every German child.
   It goes:

   “Weisst du, wieviel Sternlein stehen
   An dem blauen Himmelszelt?
   Weisst du, wieviel Wolken gehen
   Weithin über alle Welt?
   Gott, der Herr, hat sie gezählet
   Dass ihm auch nicht eines fehlet
   An der ganzen, grossen Zahl.”
   W. Hey

In English this says: “Knowest thou how many stars stand in the
blue tent of heaven? Knowest thou how many clouds pass far
over the whole world? The Lord God hath counted them, that
not one of the whole great number be lacking.”
   This little song is an interesting theme for the philosopher
and the historian of science, in that it puts side by side two sci-
ences which have the one similarity of dealing with the heav-
ens above us, but which in almost every other respect offer
an extreme contrast. Astronomy is the oldest of the sciences,
while meteorology is among the youngest to begin to deserve
the name. The more familiar astronomical phenomena can


===== PDF PAGE 093 =====

44                                                         Chapter I



be predicted for many centuries, while a precise prediction of
tomorrow’s weather is generally not easy and in many places
very crude indeed.
     To go back to the poem, the answer to the first question is
that, within limits, we do know how many stars there are. In
the first place, apart from minor uncertainties concerning some
of the double and variable stars, a star is a definite object, emi-
nently suitable for counting and cataloguing; and if a human
Durchmusterung of the stars—­as we call these catalogues—­stops
short for stars less intense than a certain magnitude, there is
nothing too repugnant to us in the idea of a divine Durchmuster-
ung going much further.
     On the other hand, if you were to ask the meteorologist to give
you a similar Durchmusterung of the clouds, he might laugh in
your face, or he might patiently explain that in all the language
of meteorology there is no such thing as a cloud, defined as an
object with a quasi-­permanent identity; and that if there were,
he neither possesses the facilities to count them, nor is he in fact
interested in counting them. A topologically inclined meteo-
rologist might perhaps define a cloud as a connected region of
space in which the density of the part of the water content in the
solid or liquid state exceeds a certain amount, but this definition
would not be of the slightest value to anyone, and would at most
represent an extremely transitory state. What really concerns
the meteorologist is some such statistical statement as, “Boston:
January 17, 1950: Sky 38% overcast: Cirrocumulus.”
     There is of course a branch of astronomy which deals with
what may be called cosmic meteorology: the study of galaxies
and nebulae and star clusters and their statistics, as pursued for
example by Chandrasekhar, but this is a very young branch of
astronomy, younger than meteorology itself, and is something


===== PDF PAGE 094 =====

Newtonian and Bergsonian Time                                  45



outside the tradition of classical astronomy. This tradition,
apart from its purely classificatory, Durchmusterung aspects, was
originally concerned rather with the solar system than with the
world of the fixed stars. It is the astronomy of the solar system
which is that chiefly associated with the names of Copernicus,
Kepler, Galileo, and Newton, and which was the wet nurse of
modern physics.
  It is indeed an ideally simple science. Even before the exis-
tence of any adequate dynamical theory, even as far back as the
Babylonians, it was realized that eclipses occurred in regular
predictable cycles, extending backward and forward over time.
It was realized that time itself could better be measured by the
motion of the stars in their courses than in any other way. The
pattern for all events in the solar system was the revolution of a
wheel or a series of wheels, whether in the form of the Ptolemaic
theory of epicycles or the Copernican theory of orbits, and in
any such theory the future after a fashion repeats the past. The
music of the spheres is a palindrome, and the book of astron-
omy reads the same backward as forward. There is no difference
save of initial positions and directions between the motion of an
orrery turned forward and one run in reverse. Finally, when all
this was reduced by Newton to a formal set of postulates and a
closed mechanics, the fundamental laws of this mechanics were
unaltered by the transformation of the time variable t into its
negative.
  Thus if we were to take a motion picture of the planets,
speeded up to show a perceptible picture of activity, and were
to run the film backward, it would still be a possible picture of
planets conforming to the Newtonian mechanics. On the other
hand, if we were to take a motion-­picture photograph of the tur-
bulence of the clouds in a thunderhead and reverse it, it would


===== PDF PAGE 095 =====

46                                                         Chapter I



look altogether wrong. We should see downdrafts where we
expect updrafts, turbulence growing coarser in texture, lightning
preceding instead of following the changes of cloud which usu-
ally precede it, and so on indefinitely.
     What is the difference between the astronomical and the
meteorological situation which brings about all these differ-
ences, and in particular the difference between the apparent
reversibility of astronomical time and the apparent irreversibil-
ity of meteorological time? In the first place, the meteorological
system is one involving a vast number of approximately equal
particles, some of them very closely coupled to one another,
while the astronomical system of the solar universe contains
only a relatively small number of particles, greatly diverse in
size and coupled with one another in a sufficiently loose way
that the second-­order coupling effects do not change the general
aspect of the picture we observe, and the very high order cou-
pling effects are completely negligible. The planets move under
conditions more favorable to the isolation of a certain limited
set of forces than those of any physical experiment we can set up
in the laboratory. Compared with the distances between them,
the planets, and even the sun, are very nearly points. Compared
with the elastic and plastic deformations they suffer, the planets
are either very nearly rigid bodies, or, where they are not, their
internal forces are at any rate of a relatively slight, significance
where the relative motion of their centers is concerned. The
space in which they move is almost perfectly free from imped-
ing matter; and in their mutual attraction, their masses may be
considered to lie very nearly at their centers and to be constant.
The departure of the law of gravity from the inverse square law
is most minute. The positions, velocities, and masses of the bod-
ies of the solar system are extremely well known at any time,


===== PDF PAGE 096 =====

Newtonian and Bergsonian Time                                    47



and the computation of their future and past positions, while
not easy in detail, is easy and precise in principle. On the other
hand, in meteorology, the number of particles concerned is so
enormous that an accurate record of their initial positions and
velocities is utterly impossible; and if this record were actually
made and their future positions and velocities computed, we
should have nothing but an impenetrable mass of figures which
would need a radical reinterpretation before it could be of any
service to us. The terms “cloud,” “temperature,” “turbulence,”
etc., are all terms referring not to one single physical situation
but to a distribution of possible situations of which only one
actual case is realized. If all the readings of all the meteorologi-
cal stations on earth were simultaneously taken, they would not
give a billionth part of the data necessary to characterize the
actual state of the atmosphere from a Newtonian point of view.
They would only give certain constants consistent with an infin-
ity of different atmospheres, and at most, together with certain
a priori assumptions, capable of giving, as a probability distribu-
tion, a measure over the set of possible atmospheres. Using the
Newtonian laws, or any other system of causal laws whatever, all
that we can predict at any future time is a probability distribu-
tion of the constants of the system, and even this predictability
fades out with the increase of time.
   Now, even in a Newtonian system, in which time is per-
fectly reversible, questions of probability and prediction lead to
answers asymmetrical as between past and future, because the
questions to which they are answers are asymmetrical. If I set up
a physical experiment, I bring the system I am considering from
the past into the present in such a way that I fix certain quanti-
ties and have a reasonable right to assume that certain other
quantities have known statistical distributions. I then observe


===== PDF PAGE 097 =====

48                                                           Chapter I



the statistical distribution of results after a given time. This is not
a process which I can reverse. In order to do so, it would be nec-
essary to pick out a fair distribution of systems which, without
intervention on our part, would end up within certain statistical
limits, and find out what the antecedent conditions were a given
time ago. However, for a system starting from an unknown posi-
tion to end up in any tightly defined statistical range is so rare
an occurrence that we may regard it as a miracle, and we can-
not base our experimental technique on awaiting and counting
miracles. In short, we are directed in time, and our relation to
the future is different from our relation to the past. All our ques-
tions are conditioned by this asymmetry, and all our answers to
these questions are equally conditioned by it.
     A very interesting astronomical question concerning the
direction of time comes up in connection with the time of astro-
physics, in which we are observing remote heavenly bodies in a
single observation, and in which there seems to be no unidirec-
tionalness in the nature of our experiment. Why then does the
unidirectional thermodynamics which is based on experimental
terrestrial observations stand us in such good stead in astrophys-
ics? The answer is interesting and not too obvious. Our obser-
vations of the stars are through the agency of light, of rays or
particles emerging from the observed object and perceived by us.
We can perceive incoming light, but cannot perceive outgoing
light, or at least the perception of outgoing light is not achieved
by an experiment as simple and direct as that of incoming light.
In the perception of incoming light, we end up with the eye or
a photographic plate. We condition these for the reception of
images by putting them in a state of insulation for some time
past: we dark-­condition the eye to avoid after-­images, and we
wrap our plates in black paper to prevent halation. It is clear


===== PDF PAGE 098 =====

Newtonian and Bergsonian Time                                    49



that only such an eye and only such plates are any use to us:
if we were given to pre-­images, we might as well be blind; and
if we had to put our plates in black paper after we use them
and develop them before using, photography would be a very
difficult art indeed. This being the case, we can see those stars
radiating to us and to the whole world; while if there are any
stars whose evolution is in the reverse direction, they will attract
radiation from the whole heavens, and even this attraction from
us will not be perceptible in any way, in view of the fact that we
already know our own past but not our future. Thus the part of
the universe which we see must have its past-­future relations, as
far as the emission of radiation is concerned, concordant with
our own. The very fact that we see a star means that its thermo-
dynamics is like our own.
   Indeed, it is a very interesting intellectual experiment to
make the fantasy of an intelligent being whose time should run
the other way to our own. To such a being, all communication
with us would be impossible. Any signal he might send would
reach us with a logical stream of consequents from his point of
view, antecedents from ours. These antecedents would already
be in our experience, and would have served to us as the natu-
ral explanation of his signal, without presupposing an intelli-
gent being to have sent it. If he drew us a square, we should see
the remains of his figure as its precursors, and it would seem to
be the curious crystallization—­always perfectly explainable—­of
these remains. Its meaning would seem to be as fortuitous as
the faces we read into mountains and cliffs. The drawing of the
square would appear to us as a catastrophe—­
                                           sudden indeed,
but explainable by natural laws—­by which that square would
cease to exist. Our counterpart would have exactly similar ideas


===== PDF PAGE 099 =====

50                                                        Chapter I



concerning us. Within any world with which we can communicate,
the direction of time is uniform.
     To return to the contrast between Newtonian astronomy and
meteorology: most sciences lie in an intermediate position, but
most are rather nearer to meteorology than to astronomy. Even
astronomy, as we have seen, contains a cosmic meteorology. It
contains as well that extremely interesting field studied by Sir
George Darwin, and known as the theory of tidal evolution. We
have said that we can treat the relative movements of the sun
and the planets as the movements of rigid bodies, but this is not
quite the case. The earth, for example, is nearly surrounded by
oceans. The water nearer the moon than the center of the earth
is more strongly attracted to the moon than the solid part of the
earth, and the water on the other side is less strongly attracted.
This relatively slight effect pulls the water into two hills, one
under the moon and one opposite to the moon. In a perfectly
liquid sphere, these hills could follow the moon around the
earth with no great dispersal of energy, and consequently would
remain almost precisely under the moon and opposite to the
moon. They would consequently have a pull on the moon
which would not greatly influence the angular position of the
moon in the heavens. However, the tidal wave they produce on
the earth gets tangled up and delayed on coasts and in shallow
seas such as the Bering Sea and the Irish Sea. It consequently
lags behind the position of the moon, and the forces producing
this are largely turbulent, dissipative forces, of a character much
like the forces met in meteorology, and need a statistical treat-
ment. Indeed, oceanography may be called the meteorology of
the hydrosphere rather than of the atmosphere.
     These frictional forces drag the moon back in its course about
the earth and accelerate the rotation of the earth forward. They


===== PDF PAGE 100 =====

Newtonian and Bergsonian Time                                   51



tend to bring the lengths of the month and of the day ever closer
to one another. Indeed, the day of the moon is the month, and
the moon always presents nearly the same face to the earth. It
has been suggested that this is the result of an ancient tidal evo-
lution, when the moon contained some liquid or gas or plastic
material which could give under the earth’s attraction, and in so
giving could dissipate large amounts of energy. This phenome-
non of tidal evolution is not confined to the earth and the moon
but may be observed to some degree throughout all gravitating
systems. In ages past it has seriously modified the face of the
solar system, though in anything like historic times this modi-
fication is slight compared with the “rigid-­body” motion of the
planets of the solar system.
   Thus even gravitational astronomy involves frictional proc-
esses that run down. There is not a single science which con-
forms precisely to the strict Newtonian pattern. The biological
sciences certainly have their full share of one-­way phenomena.
Birth is not the exact reverse of death, nor is anabolism—­the
building up of tissues—­the exact reverse of catabolism—­their
breaking down. The division of cells does not follow a pattern
symmetrical in time, nor does the union of the germ cells to
form the fertilized ovum. The individual is an arrow pointed
through time in one way, and the race is equally directed from
the past into the future.
   The record of paleontology indicates a definite long-­
                                                        time
trend, interrupted and complicated though it might be, from
the simple to the complex. By the middle of the last century this
trend had become apparent to all scientists with an honestly
open mind, and it is no accident that the problem of discovering
its mechanisms was carried ahead through the same great step
by two men working at about the same time: Charles Darwin


===== PDF PAGE 101 =====

52                                                         Chapter I



and Alfred Wallace. This step was the realization that a mere for-
tuitous variation of the individuals of a species might be carved
into the form of a more or less one-­directional or few-­directional
progress for each line by the varying degrees of viability of the
several variations, either from the point of view of the individual
or of the race. A mutant dog without legs will certainly starve,
while a long thin lizard that has developed the mechanism of
crawling on its ribs may have a better chance for survival if it
has clean lines and is freed from the impeding projections of
limbs. An aquatic animal, whether fish, lizard, or mammal, will
swim better with a fusiform shape, powerful body muscles, and
a posterior appendage which will catch the water; and if it is
dependent for its food on the pursuit of swift prey, its chances of
survival may depend on its assuming this form.
     Darwinian evolution is thus a mechanism by which a more
or less fortuitous variability is combined into a rather definite
pattern. Darwin’s principle still holds today, though we have a
much better knowledge of the mechanism on which it depends.
The work of Mendel has given us a far more precise and dis-
continuous view of heredity than that held by Darwin, while
the notion of mutation, from the time of de Vries on, has com-
pletely altered our conception of the statistical basis of muta-
tion. We have studied the fine anatomy of the chromosome and
have localized the gene on it. The list of modern geneticists is
long and distinguished. Several of these, such as Haldane, have
made the statistical study of Mendelianism an effective tool for
the study of evolution.
     We have already spoken of the tidal evolution of Sir George
Darwin, Charles Darwin’s son. Neither the connection of the
idea of the son with that of the father nor the choice of the
name “evolution” is fortuitous. In tidal evolution as well as in


===== PDF PAGE 102 =====

Newtonian and Bergsonian Time                                   53



the origin of species, we have a mechanism by means of which
a fortuitous variability, that of the random motions of the waves
in a tidal sea and of the molecules of the water, is converted by
a dynamical process into a pattern of development which reads
in one direction. The theory of tidal evolution is quite definitely
an astronomical application of the elder Darwin.
   The third of the dynasty of Darwins, Sir Charles, is one of the
authorities on modern quantum mechanics. This fact may be
fortuitous, but it nevertheless represents an even further inva-
sion of Newtonian ideas by ideas of statistics. The succession
of names Maxwell-­
                 Boltzmann-­
                           Gibbs represents a progressive
reduction of thermodynamics to statistical mechanics: that is, a
reduction of the phenomena concerning heat and temperature
to phenomena in which a Newtonian mechanics is applied to
a situation in which we deal not with a single dynamical sys-
tem but with a statistical distribution of dynamical systems;
and in which our conclusions concern not all such systems
but an overwhelming majority of them. About the year 1900,
it became apparent that there was something seriously wrong
with thermodynamics, particularly where it concerned radia-
tion. The ether showed much less power to absorb radiations
of high frequency—­as shown by the law of Planck—­than any
existing mechanization of radiation theory had allowed. Planck
gave a quasi-­atomic theory of radiation—­the quantum theory—­
which accounted satisfactorily enough for these phenomena,
but which was at odds with the whole remainder of physics;
and Niels Bohr followed this up with a similarly ad hoc theory
of the atom. Thus Newton and Planck-­
                                    Bohr formed, respec-
tively, the thesis and antithesis of a Hegelian antinomy. The
synthesis is the statistical theory discovered by Heisenberg in
1925, in which the statistical Newtonian dynamics of Gibbs is


===== PDF PAGE 103 =====

54                                                         Chapter I



replaced by a statistical theory very similar to that of Newton
and Gibbs for large-­scale phenomena, but in which the com-
plete collection of data for the present and the past is not suf-
ficient to predict the future more than statistically. It is thus not
too much to say that not only the Newtonian astronomy but
even the Newtonian physics has become a picture of the aver-
age results of a statistical situation, and hence an account of an
evolutionary process.
     This transition from a Newtonian, reversible time to a
Gibbsian, irreversible time has had its philosophical echoes.
Bergson emphasized the difference between the reversible time
of physics, in which nothing new happens, and the irreversible
time of evolution and biology, in which there is always some-
thing new. The realization that the Newtonian physics was not
the proper frame for biology was perhaps the central point in the
old controversy between vitalism and mechanism; although this
was complicated by the desire to conserve in some form or other
at least the shadows of the soul and of God against the inroads of
materialism. In the end, as we have seen, the vitalist proved too
much. Instead of building a wall between the claims of life and
those of physics, the wall has been erected to surround so wide
a compass that both matter and life find themselves inside it. It
is true that the matter of the newer physics is not the matter of
Newton, but it is something quite as remote from the anthropo-
morphizing desires of the vitalists. The chance of the quantum
theoretician is not the ethical freedom of the Augustinian, and
Tyche is as relentless a mistress as Ananke.
     The thought of every age is reflected in its technique. The
civil engineers of ancient days were land surveyors, astronomers,
and navigators; those of the seventeenth and early eighteenth
centuries were clockmakers and grinders of lenses. As in ancient


===== PDF PAGE 104 =====

Newtonian and Bergsonian Time                                     55



times, the craftsmen made their tools in the image of the heav-
ens. A watch is nothing but a pocket orrery, moving by necessity
as do the celestial spheres; and if friction and the dissipation of
energy play a role in it, they are effects to be overcome, so that
the resulting motion of the hands may be as periodic and regular
as possible. The chief technical result of this engineering after
the model of Huyghens and Newton was the age of navigation,
in which for the first time it was possible to compute longitudes
with a respectable precision, and to convert the commerce of the
great oceans from a thing of chance and adventure to a regular
understood business. It is the engineering of the mercantilists.
   To the merchant succeeded the manufacturer, and to the chro-
nometer, the steam engine. From the Newcomen engine almost
to the present time, the central field of engineering has been
the study of prime movers. Heat has been converted into usable
energy of rotation and translation, and the physics of Newton
has been supplemented by that of Rumford, Carnot, and Joule.
Thermodynamics makes its appearance, a science in which time
is eminently irreversible; and although the earlier stages of this
science seem to represent a region of thought almost without
contact with the Newtonian dynamics, the theory of the con-
servation of energy and the later statistical explanation of the
Carnot principle or second law of thermodynamics or principle
of the degradation of energy—­that principle which makes the
maximum efficiency obtainable by a steam engine depend on
the working temperatures of the boiler and the condenser—­all
these have fused thermodynamics and the Newtonian dynam-
ics into the statistical and the non-­statistical aspects of the same
science.
   If the seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries are the age
of clocks, and the later eighteenth and the nineteenth centuries


===== PDF PAGE 105 =====

56                                                         Chapter I



constitute the age of steam engines, the present time is the age
of communication and control. There is in electrical engineer-
ing a split which is known in Germany as the split between the
technique of strong currents and the technique of weak cur-
rents, and which we know as the distinction between power and
communication engineering. It is this split which separates the
age just past from that in which we are now living. Actually,
communication engineering can deal with currents of any size
whatever and with the movement of engines powerful enough
to swing massive gun turrets; what distinguishes it from power
engineering is that its main interest is not economy of energy
but the accurate reproduction of a signal. This signal may be the
tap of a key, to be reproduced as the tap of a telegraph receiver
at the other end; or it may be a sound transmitted and received
through the apparatus of a telephone; or it may be the turn of
a ship’s wheel, received as the angular position of the rudder.
Thus communication engineering began with Gauss, Wheat-
stone, and the first telegraphers. It received its first reasonably
scientific treatment at the hands of Lord Kelvin, after the failure
of the first transatlantic cable in the middle of the last century;
and from the eighties on, it was perhaps Heaviside who did the
most to bring it into a modern shape. The discovery of radar
and its use in the Second World War, together with the exigen-
cies of the control of anti-­aircraft fire, have brought to the field
a large number of well-­trained mathematicians and physicists.
The wonders of the automatic computing machine belong to
the same realm of ideas, which was certainly never so actively
pursued in the past as it is at the present day.
     At every stage of technique since Daedalus or Hero of Alexan-
dria, the ability of the artificer to produce a working simulacrum
of a living organism has always intrigued people. This desire to


===== PDF PAGE 106 =====

Newtonian and Bergsonian Time                                   57



produce and to study automata has always been expressed in
terms of the living technique of the age. In the days of magic, we
have the bizarre and sinister concept of the Golem, that figure
of clay into which the Rabbi of Prague breathed life with the
blasphemy of the Ineffable Name of God. In the time of Newton,
the automaton becomes the clockwork music box, with the little
effigies pirouetting stiffly on top. In the nineteenth century, the
automaton is a glorified heat engine, burning some combusti-
ble fuel instead of the glycogen of the human muscles. Finally,
the present automaton opens doors by means of photocells, or
points guns to the place at which a radar beam picks up an air-
plane, or computes the solution of a differential equation.
   Neither the Greek nor the magical automaton lies along
the main lines of the direction of development of the modern
machine, nor do they seem to have had much of an influence on
serious philosophic thought. It is far different with the clockwork
automaton. This idea has played a very genuine and important
role in the early history of modern philosophy, although we are
rather prone to ignore it.
   To begin with, Descartes considers the lower animals as
automata. This is done to avoid questioning the orthodox Chris-
tian attitude that animals have no souls to be saved or damned.
Just how these living automata function is something that Des-
cartes, so far as I know, never discusses. However, the impor-
tant allied question of the mode of coupling of the human soul,
both in sensation and in will, with its material environment is
one which Descartes does discuss, although in a very unsatisfac-
tory manner. He places this coupling in the one median part
of the brain known to him, the pineal gland. As to the nature
of his coupling—­whether or not it represents a direct action of
mind on matter and of matter on mind—­he is none too clear.


===== PDF PAGE 107 =====

58                                                       Chapter I



He probably does regard it as a direct action in both ways, but he
attributes the validity of human experience in its action on the
outside world to the goodness and honesty of God.
     The role attributed to God in this matter is unstable. Either
God is entirely passive, in which case it is hard to see how
Descartes’ explanation really explains anything, or He is an
active participant, in which case it is hard to see how the guar-
antee given by His honesty can be anything but an active partici-
pation in the act of sensation. Thus the causal chain of material
phenomena is paralleled by a causal chain starting with the
act of God, by which He produces in us the experiences corre-
sponding to a given material situation. Once this is assumed, it
is entirely natural to attribute the correspondence between our
will and the effects it seems to produce in the external world to
a similar divine intervention. This is the path followed by the
Occasionalists, Geulincx and Malebranche: In Spinoza, who is
in many ways the continuator of this school, the doctrine of
Occasionalism assumes the more reasonable form of asserting
that the correspondence between mind and matter is that of two
self-­contained attributes of God; but Spinoza is not dynamically
minded, and gives little or no attention to the mechanism of
this correspondence.
     This is the situation from which Leibniz starts, but Leibniz
is as dynamically minded as Spinoza is geometrically minded.
First, he replaces the pair of corresponding elements, mind and
matter, by a continuum of corresponding elements: the monads.
While these are conceived after the pattern of the soul, they
include many instances which do not rise to the degree of self-­
consciousness of full souls, and which form part of that world
which Descartes would have attributed to matter. Each of them
lives in its own closed universe, with a perfect causal chain from


===== PDF PAGE 108 =====

Newtonian and Bergsonian Time                                    59



the creation or from minus infinity in time to the indefinitely
remote future; but closed though they are, they correspond one
to the other through the pre-­established harmony of God. Leib-
niz compares them to clocks which have so been wound up as
to keep time together from the creation for all eternity. Unlike
humanly made clocks, they do not drift into asynchronism;
but this is due to the miraculously perfect workmanship of the
Creator.
   Thus Leibniz considers a world of automata, which, as is nat-
ural in a disciple of Huyghens, he constructs after the model of
clockwork. Though the monads reflect one another, the reflec-
tion does not consist in a transfer of the causal chain from one
to another. They are actually as self-­contained as, or rather more
self-­contained than, the passively dancing figures on top of a
music box. They have no real influence on the outside world,
nor are they effectively influenced by it. As he says, they have
no windows. The apparent organization of the world we see is
something between a figment and a miracle. The monad is a
Newtonian solar system writ small.
   In the nineteenth century, the automata which are humanly
constructed and those other natural automata, the animals and
plants of the materialist, are studied from a very different aspect.
The conservation and the degradation of energy are the ruling
principles of the day. The living organism is above all a heat
engine, burning glucose or glycogen or starch, fats, and proteins
into carbon dioxide, water, and urea. It is the metabolic balance
which is the center of attention; and if the low working tempera-
tures of animal muscle attract attention as opposed to the high
working temperatures of a heat engine of similar efficiency, this
fact is pushed into a corner and glibly explained by a contrast
between the chemical energy of the living organism and the


===== PDF PAGE 109 =====

60                                                        Chapter I



thermal energy of the heat engine. All the fundamental notions
are those associated with energy, and the chief of these is that
of potential. The engineering of the body is a branch of power-­
engineering. Even today, this is the predominating point of view
of the more classically minded, conservative physiologists; and
the whole trend of thought of such biophysicists as Rashevsky
and his school bears witness to its continued potency.
     Today we are coming to realize that the body is very far from
a conservative system, and that its component parts work in
an environment where the available power is much less lim-
ited than we have taken it to be. The electronic tube has shown
us that a system with an outside source of energy, almost all of
which is wasted, may be a very effective agency for perform-
ing desired operations, especially if it is worked at a low energy
level. We are beginning to see that such important elements as
the neurons, the atoms of the nervous complex of our body, do
their work under much the same conditions as vacuum tubes,
with their relatively small power supplied from outside by the
circulation, and that the bookkeeping which is most essential to
describe their function is not one of energy. In short, the newer
study of automata, whether in the metal or in the flesh, is a
branch of communication engineering, and its cardinal notions
are those of message, amount of disturbance or “noise”—­a term
taken over from the telephone engineer—­quantity of informa-
tion, coding technique, and so on.
     In such a theory, we deal with automata effectively coupled to
the external world, not merely by their energy flow, their metab-
olism, but also by a flow of impressions, of incoming messages,
and of the actions of outgoing messages. The organs by which
impressions are received are the equivalents of the human and
animal sense organs. They comprise photoelectric cells and


===== PDF PAGE 110 =====

Newtonian and Bergsonian Time                                   61



other receptors for light; radar systems, receiving their own
short Hertzian waves; hydrogen-­ion-­potential recorders, which
may be said to taste; thermometers; pressure gauges of various
sorts; microphones; and so on. The effectors may be electrical
motors or solenoids or heating coils or other instruments of very
diverse sorts. Between the receptor or sense organ and the effec-
tor stands an intermediate set of elements, whose function is to
recombine the incoming impressions into such form as to pro-
duce a desired type of response in the effectors. The information
fed into this central control system will very often contain infor-
mation concerning the functioning of the effectors themselves.
These correspond among other things to the kinesthetic organs
and other proprioceptors of the human system, for we too have
organs which record the position of a joint or the rate of con-
traction of a muscle, etc. Moreover, the information received by
the automaton need not be used at once but may be delayed or
stored so as to become available at some future time. This is the
analogue of memory. Finally, as long as the automaton is run-
ning, its very rules of operation are susceptible to some change
on the basis of the data which have passed through its receptors
in the past, and this is not unlike the process of learning.
   The machines of which we are now speaking are not the
dream of the sensationalist nor the hope of some future time.
They already exist as thermostats, automatic gyrocompass ship-­
steering systems, self-­propelled missiles—­especially such as seek
their target—­
             anti-­
                  aircraft fire-­
                                control systems, automatically
controlled oil-­cracking stills, ultra-­rapid computing machines,
and the like. They had begun to be used long before the war—­
indeed, the very old steam-­
                           engine governor belongs among
them—­but the great mechanization of the Second World War
brought them into their own, and the need of handling the


===== PDF PAGE 111 =====

62                                                        Chapter I



extremely dangerous energy of the atom will probably bring
them to a still higher point of development. Scarcely a month
passes but a new book appears on these so-­called control mech-
anisms, or servomechanisms, and the present age is as truly
the age of servomechanisms as the nineteenth century was the
age of the steam engine or the eighteenth century the age of
the clock.
     To sum up: the many automata of the present age are coupled
to the outside world both for the reception of impressions and
for the performance of actions. They contain sense organs, effec-
tors, and the equivalent of a nervous system to integrate the
transfer of information from the one to the other. They lend
themselves very well to description in physiological terms. It is
scarcely a miracle that they can be subsumed under one theory
with the mechanisms of physiology.
     The relation of these mechanisms to time demands careful
study. It is clear, of course, that the relation input-­output is a
consecutive one in time and involves a definite past-­future order.
What is perhaps not so clear is that the theory of the sensitive
automata is a statistical one. We are scarcely ever interested in
the performance of a communication-­engineering machine for
a single input. To function adequately, it must give a satisfac-
tory performance for a whole class of inputs, and this means a
statistically satisfactory performance for the class of input which
it is statistically expected to receive. Thus its theory belongs to
the Gibbsian statistical mechanics rather than to the classical
Newtonian mechanics. We shall study this in much more detail
in the chapter devoted to the theory of communication.
     Thus the modern automaton exists in the same sort of Bergso-
nian time as the living organism; and hence there is no reason in
Bergson’s considerations why the essential mode of functioning


===== PDF PAGE 112 =====

Newtonian and Bergsonian Time                                  63



of the living organism should not be the same as that of the
automaton of this type. Vitalism has won to the extent that
even mechanisms correspond to the time-­structure of vitalism;
but as we have said, this victory is a complete defeat, for from
every point of view which has the slightest relation to morality
or religion, the new mechanics is fully as mechanistic as the old.
Whether we should call the new point of view materialistic is
largely a question of words: the ascendancy of matter character-
izes a phase of nineteenth-­century physics far more than the
present age, and “materialism” has come to be but little more
than a loose synonym for “mechanism.” In fact, the whole
mechanist-­vitalist controversy has been relegated to the limbo
of badly posed questions.


===== PDF PAGE 113 =====



===== PDF PAGE 114 =====

II Groups and Statistical Mechanics




At about the beginning of the present century, two scientists,
one in the United States and one in France, were working along
lines which would have seemed to each of them entirely unre-
lated, if either had had the remotest idea of the existence of the
other. In New Haven, Willard Gibbs was developing his new
point of view in statistical mechanics. In Paris, Henri Lebesgue
was rivalling the fame of his master Emile Borel by the discovery
of a revised and more powerful theory of integration for use in
the study of trigonometric series. The two discoverers were alike
in this, that each was a man of the study rather than of the labo-
ratory, but from this point on, their whole attitudes to science
were diametrically opposite.
  Gibbs, mathematician though he was, always regarded math-
ematics as ancillary to physics. Lebesgue was an analyst of the
purest type, an able exponent of the extremely exacting modern
standards of mathematical rigor, and a writer whose works, as
far as I know, do not contain one single example of a problem
or a method originating directly from physics. Nevertheless, the
work of these two men forms a single whole in which the ques-
tions asked by Gibbs find their answers, not in his own work but
in the work of Lebesgue.


===== PDF PAGE 115 =====

66                                                        Chapter II



     The key idea of Gibbs is this: in Newton’s dynamics, in its
original form, we are concerned with an individual system,
with given initial velocities and momenta, undergoing changes
according to a certain system of forces under the Newtonian laws
which link force and acceleration. In the vast majority of practi-
cal cases, however, we are far from knowing all the initial veloci-
ties and momenta. If we assume a certain initial distribution of
the incompletely known positions and momenta of the system,
this will determine in a completely Newtonian way the distribu-
tion of the momenta and positions for any future time. It will
then be possible to make statements about these distributions,
and some of these will have the character of assertions that the
future system will have certain characteristics with probability
one, or certain other characteristics with probability zero.
     Probabilities one and zero are notions which include com-
plete certainty and complete impossibility but include much
more as well. If I shoot at a target with a bullet of the dimensions
of a point, the chance that I hit any specific point on the target
will generally be zero, although it is not impossible that I hit it;
and indeed, in each specific case I must actually hit some specific
point, which is an event of probability zero. Thus an event of
probability one, that of my hitting some point, may be made up
of an assemblage of instances of probability zero.
     Nevertheless, one of the processes which is used in the tech-
nique of the Gibbsian statistical mechanics, although it is used
implicitly, and Gibbs is nowhere clearly aware of it, is the resolu-
tion of a complex contingency into an infinite sequence of more
special contingencies—­a first, a second, a third, and so on—­each
of which has a known probability; and the expression of the
probability of this larger contingency as the sum of the probabil-
ities of the more special contingencies, which form an infinite


===== PDF PAGE 116 =====

Groups and Statistical Mechanics                                 67



sequence. Thus we cannot sum probabilities in all conceivable
cases, to get a probability of the total event—­for the sum of any
number of zeros is zero—­while we can sum them if there is a
first, a second, a third member, and so on, forming a sequence of
contingencies in which every term has a definite position given
by a positive integer.
   The distinction between these two cases involves rather sub-
tle considerations concerning the nature of sets of instances,
and Gibbs, although a very powerful mathematician, was never
a very subtle one. Is it possible for a class to be infinite and yet
essentially different in multiplicity from another infinite class,
such as that of the positive integers? This problem was solved
toward the end of the last century by Georg Cantor, and the
answer is “Yes.” If we consider all the distinct decimal fractions,
terminating or non-­terminating, lying between 0 and 1, it is
known that they cannot be arranged in 1, 2, 3 order—­although,
strangely enough, all the terminating decimal fractions can be so
arranged. Thus the distinction demanded by the Gibbs statistical
mechanics is not on the face of it an impossible one. The ser-
vice of Lebesgue to the Gibbs theory is to show that the implicit
requirements of statistical mechanics concerning contingencies
of probability zero and the addition of the probabilities of con-
tingencies can actually be met, and that the Gibbsian theory
does not involve contradictions.
   Lebesgue’s work, however, was not directly based on the needs
of statistical mechanics but on what looks like a very different
theory, the theory of trigonometric series. This goes back to the
eighteenth-­century physics of waves and vibrations, and to the
then moot question of the generality of the sets of motions of a
linear system which can be synthesized out of the simple vibra-
tions of the system—­out of those vibrations, in other words, for


===== PDF PAGE 117 =====

68                                                      Chapter II



which the passing of time simply multiplies the deviations of
the system from equilibrium by a quantity, positive or negative,
dependent on the time alone and not on position. Thus a single
function is expressed as the sum of a series. In these series, the
coefficients are expressed as averages of the product of the func-
tion to be represented, multiplied by a given weighting func-
tion. The whole theory depends on the properties of the average
of a series, in terms of the average of an individual term. Notice
that the average of a quantity which is 1 over an interval from 0
to A, and 0 from A to 1, is A, and may be regarded as the prob-
ability that the random point should lie in the interval from
0 to A if it is known to lie between 0 and 1. In other words,
the theory needed for the average of a series is very close to the
theory needed for an adequate discussion of probabilities com-
pounded from an infinite sequence of cases. This is the reason
why Lebesgue, in solving his own problem, had also solved that
of Gibbs.
     The particular distributions discussed by Gibbs have them-
selves a dynamical interpretation. If we consider a certain very
general sort of conservative dynamical system, with N degrees
of freedom, we find that its position and velocity coordinates
may be reduced to a special set of 2N coordinates, N of which are
called the generalized position coordinates and N the general-
ized momenta. These determine a 2N-­dimensional space defin-
ing a 2N-­dimensional volume; and if we take any region of this
space and let the points flow with the course of time, which
changes every set of 2N coordinates into a new set depending on
the elapsed time, the continual change of the boundary of the
region does not change its 2N-­dimensional volume. In general,
for sets not so simply defined as these regions, the notion of
volume generates a system of measure of the type of Lebesgue.


===== PDF PAGE 118 =====

Groups and Statistical Mechanics                                69



In this system of measure, and in the conservative dynamical
systems which are transformed in such a way as to keep this
measure constant, there is one other numerically valued entity
which also remains constant: the energy. If all the bodies in the
system act only on one another and there are no forces attached
to fixed positions and fixed orientations in space, there are two
other expressions which also remain constant. Both of these
are vectors: the momentum, and the moment of momentum
of the system as a whole. They are not difficult to eliminate,
so that the system is replaced by a system with fewer degrees
of freedom.
   In highly specialized systems, there may be other quanti-
ties not determined by the energy, the momentum, and the
moment of momentum, which are unchanged as the system
develops. However, it is known that systems in which another
invariant quantity exists, dependent on the initial coordinates
and momenta of a dynamical system, and regular enough to
be subject to the system of integration based on Lebesgue mea-
sure, are very rare indeed in a quite precise sense.1 In systems
without other invariant quantities, we can fix the coordinates
corresponding to energy, momentum, and total moment of
momentum, and in the space of the remaining coordinates, the
measure determined by the position and momentum coordi-
nates will itself determine a sort of sub-­measure, just as measure
in space will determine area on a two-­dimensional surface out of
a family of two-­dimensional surfaces. For example, if our family
is that of concentric spheres, then the volume between two con-
centric spheres close together, when normalized by taking as one
the total volume of the region between the two spheres, will give
in the limit a measure of area on the surface of a sphere.


===== PDF PAGE 119 =====

70                                                         Chapter II



     Let us then take this new measure on a region in phase
space for which energy, total momentum, and total moment of
momentum are determined, and let us suppose that there are
no other measurable invariant quantities in the system. Let the
total measure of this restricted region be constant, or as as we
can make it by a change in scale, 1. As our measure has been
obtained from a measure invariant in time, in a way invariant in
time, it will itself be invariant. We shall call this measure phase
measure, and averages taken with respect to it phase averages.
     However, any quantity varying in time may also have a time
average. If, for example, f(t) depends on t, its time average for the
past will be

       1 0
       T ∫− T
lim           f (t ) dt                                       (2.01)
T →∞


and its time average for the future

       1 T
       T ∫0
lim         f (t ) dt                                         (2.02)
T →∞


     In Gibbs’ statistical mechanics, both time averages and space
averages occur. It was a brilliant idea of Gibbs to try to show that
these two types of average were, in some sense, the same. In the
notion that these two types of average were related, Gibbs was
perfectly right; and in the method by which he tried to show
this relation, he was utterly and hopelessly wrong. For this he
was scarcely to blame. Even at the time of his death, the fame
of the Lebesgue integral had just begun to penetrate to America.
For another fifteen years, it was a museum curiosity, only useful
to show to young mathematicians the needs and possibilities of
rigor. A mathematician as distinguished as W. F. Osgood2 would
have nothing to do with it till his dying day. It was not until
about 1930 that a group of mathematicians—­
                                          Koopman, von


===== PDF PAGE 120 =====

Groups and Statistical Mechanics                                   71



Neumann, Birkhoff3—­finally established the proper foundations
of the Gibbs statistical mechanics. Later, in the study of ergodic
theory, we shall see what these foundations were.
   Gibbs himself thought that in a system from which all the
invariants had been removed as extra coordinates almost all
paths of points in phase space passed through all coordinates
in such a space. This hypothesis he called the ergodic hypothesis,
from the Greek words ἕργον, “work,” and ὅδός, “path.” Now, in
the first place, as Plancherel and others have shown, there is no
significant case where that hypothesis is true. No differentiable
path can cover an area in the plane, even if it is of infinite length.
The followers of Gibbs, including at the end perhaps Gibbs him-
self, saw this in a vague way, and replaced this hypothesis by the
quasi-­ergodic hypothesis, which merely asserts that in the course
of time a system generally passes indefinitely near to every point
in the region of phase space determined by the known invari-
ants. There is no logical difficulty as to the truth of this: it is
merely quite inadequate for the conclusions which Gibbs bases
on it. It says nothing about the relative time which the system
spends in the neighborhood of each point.
   Beside the notions of average and of measure—­the average
over a universe of a function 1 over a set to be measured and
0 elsewhere—­which were most urgently needed to make sense
out of Gibbs’ theory, in order to appreciate the real significance
of ergodic theory we need a more precise analysis of the notion
of invariant, as well as the notion of transformation group. These
notions were certainly familiar to Gibbs, as his study of vector
analysis shows. Nevertheless, it is possible to maintain that he
did not assess them at their full philosophical value. Like his
contemporary Heaviside, Gibbs is one of the scientists whose
physico-­mathematical acumen often outstrips their logic and


===== PDF PAGE 121 =====

72                                                           Chapter II



who are generally right, while they are often unable to explain
why and how they are right.
     For the existence of any science, it is necessary that there exist
phenomena which do not stand isolated. In a world ruled by a
succession of miracles performed by an irrational God subject
to sudden whims, we should be forced to await each new catas-
trophe in a state of perplexed passiveness. We have a picture of
such a world in the croquet game in Alice in Wonderland; where
the mallets are flamingos; the balls, hedgehogs, which quietly
unroll and go about their own business; the hoops, playing-­card
soldiers, likewise subject to locomotor initiative of their own;
and the rules are the decrees of the testy, unpredictable Queen
of Hearts.
     The essence of an effective rule for a game or a useful law
of physics is that it be statable in advance, and that it apply to
more than one case. Ideally, it should represent a property of
the system discussed which remains the same under the flux of
particular circumstances. In the simplest case, it is a property
which is invariant to a set of transformations to which the system
is subject. We are thus led to the notions of transformation, trans-
formation group, and invariant.
     A transformation of a system is some alteration in which each
element goes into another. The modification of the solar system
which occurs in the transition between time t1 and time t2 is
a transformation of the sets of coordinates of the planets. The
similar change in their coordinate when we move their origin,
or subject our geometric axes to a rotation, is a transformation.
The change in scale which occurs when we examine a prepara-
tion under the magnifying action of a microscope is likewise a
transformation.


===== PDF PAGE 122 =====

Groups and Statistical Mechanics                                      73



   The result of following a transformation A by a transforma-
tion B is another transformation, known as the product or resul-
tant BA. Note that in general it depends on the order of A and B.
Thus if A is the transformation which takes the coordinate x into
the coordinate y, and y into −x, while z is unchanged; while B
takes x into z, z into −x, and y is unchanged; then BA will take x
into y, y into −z, and z into −x; while AB will take x into z, y into
−x, and z into −y. If AB and BA are the same, we shall say that A
and B are permutable.
   Sometimes, but not always, the transformation A will not
only carry every element of the system into an element but will
have the property that every element is the result of transform-
ing an element. In this case, there is a unique transformation
A−1, such that both AA−1 and A−1A are that very special trans-
formation which we call I, the identity transformation, which
transforms every element into itself. In this case we call A−1 the
inverse of A. It is clear that A is the inverse of A−1, that I is its own
inverse, and that the inverse of AB is B−lA−1.
   There exist certain sets of transformations where every trans-
formation belonging to the set has an inverse, likewise belonging
to the set; and where the resultant of any two transformations
belonging to the set itself belongs to the set. These sets are known
as transformation groups. The set of all translations along a line,
or in a plane, or in a three-­dimensional space, is a transforma-
tion group; and even more, it is a transformation group of the
special sort known as Abelian, where any two transformations of
the group are permutable. The set of rotations about a point, and
of all motions of a rigid body in space, are non-­Abelian groups.
   Let us suppose that we have some quantity attached to all the
elements transformed by a transformation group. If this quan-
tity is unchanged when each element is changed by the same


===== PDF PAGE 123 =====

74                                                           Chapter II



transformation of the group, whatever that transformation may
be, it is called an invariant of the group. There are many sorts of
such group invariants, of which two are especially important for
our purposes.
     The first are the so-­called linear invariants. Let the elements
transformed by an Abelian group be the terms which we rep-
resent by x, and let f(x) be a complex-­valued function of these
elements, with certain appropriate properties of continuity or
integrability. Then if Tx stands for the element resulting from x
under the transformation T, and if f(x) is a function of absolute
value 1, such that

f (Tx ) = α (T ) f ( x )                                        (2.03)

where α(T) is a number of absolute value 1 depending only on
T, we shall say that f(x) is a character of the group. It is an invari-
ant of the group in a slightly generalized sense. If f(x) and g(x)
are group characters, clearly f(x)g(x) is one also, as is [f(x)]−1. If
we can represent any function h(x) defined over the group as a
linear combination of the characters of the group, in some such
form as

h ( x ) = ∑ Ak f k ( x )                                        (2.04)

where fk(x) is a character of the group, and αk(T) bears the same
relation to fk(x) that α(T) does to f(x) in Eq. 2.03, then

h (Tx ) = ∑ Ak ak (T ) f k ( x )                                (2.05)

     Thus if we can develop h(x) in terms of a set of group char-
acters, we can develop h(Tx) for all T in terms of the characters.
     We have seen that the characters of a group generate other
characters under multiplication and inversion, and it may simi-
larly be seen that the constant 1 is a character. Multiplication
by a group character thus generates a transformation group of


===== PDF PAGE 124 =====

Groups and Statistical Mechanics                                     75



the group characters themselves, which is known as the character
group of the original group.
    If the original group is the translation group on the infinite
line, so that the operator T changes x into x + T, Eq. 2.03 becomes

f ( x + T ) = α (T ) f ( x )                                      (2.06)

which is satisfied if f(x) = eiλx, α(T) = eiλT. The characters will be
the functions eiλx, and the character group will be the group of
translations changing λ into λ + τ, thus having the same struc-
ture as the original group. This will not be the case when the
original group consists of the rotations about a circle. In this
case, the operator T changes x into a number between 0 and 2π,
differing from x + T by an integral multiple of 2π, and, while Eq.
2.06 will still hold, we have the extra condition that

α (T + 2π ) = α (T )                                              (2.07)
                               iλx
    If now we put f(x) = e           as before, we shall obtain

e i2πλ = 1                                                        (2.08)
which means that λ must be a real integer, positive, negative, or
zero. The character group thus corresponds to the translations
of the real integers. If, on the other hand, the original group is
that of the translations of the integers, x and T in Eq. 2.05 are
confined to the integer values, and eiλx involves only the number
between 0 and 2π which differs from λ by an integral multiple of
2π. Thus the character group is essentially the group of rotations
about a circle.
    In any character group, for a given character f, the values
of α(T) are distributed in such a way that the distribution is
not altered when they are all multiplied by α(S), for any ele-
ments in the group. That is, if there is any reasonable basis of
taking an average of these values which is not affected by the


===== PDF PAGE 125 =====

76                                                         Chapter II



transformation of the group by the multiplication of each trans-
formation by a fixed one of its transformations, either α(T) is
always 1, or this average is invariant when multiplied by some
number not 1, and must be 0. From this it may be concluded
that the average of the product of any character by its conjugate
(which will also be a character) will have the value 1, and that
the average of the product of any character by the conjugate of
another character will have the value 0. In other words, if we can
express h(x) as in Eq. 2.04, we shall have

Ak = average h ( x ) f k ( x )                            (2.09)

     In the case of the group of rotations on a circle, this gives us
directly that if

f ( x ) = ∑ an e inx                                          (2.10)

then
        1 2π
       2π ∫0
an =         f ( x ) e − inx dx                               (2.11)

and the result for translations along the infinite line is closely
related to the fact that if in an appropriate sense
            ∞
f ( x ) = ∫ a ( λ ) e iλ x d λ                                (2.12)
            −∞


then in a certain sense

            1 ∞
           2π ∫−∞
a (λ ) =          f ( x ) e − iλ x dx                         (2.13)

     These results have been stated here very roughly and without
a clear statement of their conditions of validity. For more precise
statements of the theory, the reader should consult the follow-
ing reference.4


===== PDF PAGE 126 =====

Groups and Statistical Mechanics                                77



    Beside the theory of the linear invariants of a group, there is
also the general theory of its metrical invariants. These are the
systems of Lebesgue measure which do not undergo any change
when the objects transformed by the group are permuted by the
operators of the group. In this connection, we should cite the
interesting theory of group measure, due to Haar.5 As we have
seen, every group itself is a collection of objects which are per-
muted by being multiplied by the operations of the group itself.
As such, it may have an invariant measure. Haar has proved that
a certain rather wide class of groups does possess a uniquely
determined invariant measure, definable in terms of the struc-
ture of the group itself.
    The most important application of the theory of the metrical
invariants of a group of transformations is to show the justi-
fication of that interchangeability of phase averages and time
averages which, as we have already seen, Gibbs tried in vain
to establish. The basis on which this has been accomplished is
known as the ergodic theory. The ordinary ergodic theorems
start with an ensemble E, which we can take to be of measure 1,
transformed into itself by a measure-­preserving transformation
T or by a group of measure-­preserving transformations Tλ, where
−∞ < λ < ∞ and where

T λ ⋅ T µ = T λ +µ                                          (2.14)

    Ergodic theory concerns itself with complex-­valued functions
f(x) of the elements x of E. In all cases, f(x) is taken to be mea-
surable in x, and if we are concerned with a continuous group
of transformations, f(Tλx) is taken to be measurable in x and λ
simultaneously.
    In the mean ergodic theorem of Koopman and von Neu-
mann, f(x) is taken to be of class L2; that is,


===== PDF PAGE 127 =====

78                                                        Chapter II




∫ f ( x) dx < ∞
             2
                                                             (2.15)
 E


     The theorem then asserts that

                  1 N
f N ( x) =             ∑ f (T n x)
                 N + 1 n=0
                                                             (2.16)

or

             1 A
                  f (T λ x ) d λ
             A ∫0
f A ( x) =                                                   (2.17)

as the case may be, converges in the mean to a limit f *(x) as N →
∞ or A → ∞, respectively, in the sense that

lim ∫ f * ( x ) − f N ( x ) dx = 0
                              2
                                                             (2.18)
N →∞   E


lim ∫ f * ( x ) − f A ( x ) dx = 0
                             2
                                                             (2.19)
A→∞    E


     In the “almost everywhere” ergodic theorem of Birkhoff, f(x)
is taken to be of class L; which means that

∫ f ( x) dx < ∞
 E
                                                             (2.20)

The functions fN(x) and fA(x) are defined as in Eqs. 2.16 and 2.17.
The theorem then states that, except for a set of values of x of
measure 0,

f * ( x ) = lim f N ( x )                                    (2.21)
             N →∞


and

f * ( x ) = lim f A ( x )                                    (2.22)
             A→∞


exist.
     A very interesting case is the so-­called ergodic or metrically
transitive one, in which the transformation T or the set of trans-
formations TA leaves invariant no set of points x which has a


===== PDF PAGE 128 =====

Groups and Statistical Mechanics                                79



measure other than 1 or 0. In such a case, the set of values (for
either ergodic theorem) for which f * takes on a certain range of
value is almost always either 1 or 0. This is impossible unless
f *(x) is almost always constant. The value which f *(x) then
assumes almost always is
 1
∫ f ( x) dx
 0
                                                             (2.23)

     That is, in the Koopman theorem, we have the limit in the
mean

      1 N                    1
l.i.m.     ∑   f (T n x ) = ∫ f ( x ) dx                     (2.24)
N →∞ N + 1                   0
           n=0


and in the Birkhoff theorem, we have

        1 N                    1
lim          ∑   f (T n x ) = ∫ f ( x ) dx                   (2.25)
N →∞   N + 1 n=0               0



except for a set of values of x of zero measure or probability 0.
Similar results hold in the continuous case. This is an adequate
justification for Gibbs’ interchange of phase averages and time
averages.
     Where the transformation T or the transformation group TA
is not ergodic, von Neumann has shown under very general con-
ditions that they can be reduced to ergodic components. That is,
except for a set of values of x of zero measure, E can be separated
into a finite or denumerable set of classes En and a continuum
of classes E(y), such that a measure is established on each En and
E(y), which is invariant under T or Tλ. These transformations are
all ergodic; and if S(y) is the intersection of S with E(y) and Sn
with En, then

measure ( S ) = ∫ measure [ S ( y )] dy + ∑ measure ( Sn )   (2.26)
       E                  E (y )                 En


===== PDF PAGE 129 =====

80                                                         Chapter II



     In other words, the whole theory of measure-­
                                                 preserving
transformations can be reduced to the theory of ergodic trans-
formations.
     The whole of ergodic theory, let us remark in passing, may be
applied to groups of transformations more general than those
isomorphic with the translation group on the line. In particu-
lar, it may be applied to the translation group in n dimensions.
The case of three dimensions is physically important. The spatial
analogue of temporal equilibrium is spatial homogeneity, and
such theories as that of the homogeneous gas, liquid, or solid
depend on the application of three-­dimensional ergodic theory.
Incidentally, a non-­ergodic group of translation transformations
in three dimensions appears as the set of translations of a mix-
ture of distinct states, such that one or another exists at a given
time, not a mixture of both.
     One of the cardinal notions of statistical mechanics, which
also receives an application in the classical thermodynamics, is
that of entropy. It is primarily a property of regions in phase space
and expresses the logarithm of their probability measure. For
example, let us consider the dynamics of n particles in a bottle,
divided into two parts, A and B. If m particles are in A, and n − m
in B, we have characterized a region in phase space, and it will
have a certain probability measure. The logarithm is the entropy
of the distribution: m particles in A, n − m in B. The system will
spend most of its time in a state near that of greatest entropy,
in the sense that for most of the time, nearly m1 particles will
be in A, nearly n − m1 in B, where the probability of the combi-
nation m1 in A, n − m1 in B is a maximum. For systems with a
large number of particles and states within the limits of practical
discrimination, this means that if we take a state of other than
maximum entropy and observe what happens to it, the entropy
almost always increases.


===== PDF PAGE 130 =====

Groups and Statistical Mechanics                                 81



   In the ordinary thermodynamic problems of the heat engine,
we are dealing with conditions in which we have a rough thermal
equilibrium in large regions like an engine cylinder. The states
for which we study the entropy are states involving maximum
entropy for a given temperature and volume, for a small number
of regions of the given volumes and at the given temperature
assumed. Even the more refined discussions of thermal engines,
particularly of thermal engines like the turbine, in which a gas is
expanding in a more complicated manner than in a cylinder, do
not change these conditions too radically. We may still talk of
local temperatures, with a very fair approximation, even though
no temperature is precisely determined except in a state of equi-
librium and by methods involving this equilibrium. However,
in living matter, we lose much of even this rough homogeneity.
The structure of a protein tissue as shown by the electron micro-
scope has an enormous definiteness and fineness of texture, and
its physiology is certainly of a corresponding fineness of texture.
This fineness is far greater than that of the space-­and-­time scale
of an ordinary thermometer, and so the temperatures read by
ordinary thermometers in living tissues are gross averages and
not the true temperatures of thermodynamics. Gibbsian statis-
tical mechanics may well be a fairly adequate model of what
happens in the body; the picture suggested by the ordinary heat
engine certainly is not. The thermal efficiency of muscle action
means next to nothing, and certainly does not mean what it
appears to mean.
   A very important idea in statistical mechanics is that of the
Maxwell demon. Let us suppose a gas in which the particles are
moving around with the distribution of velocities in statistical
equilibrium for a given temperature. For a perfect gas, this is
the Maxwell distribution. Let this gas be contained in a rigid


===== PDF PAGE 131 =====

82                                                      Chapter II



container with a wall across it, containing an opening spanned
by a small gate, operated by a gatekeeper, either an anthropo-
morphic demon or a minute mechanism. When a particle of
more than average velocity approaches the gate from compart-
ment A or a particle of less than average velocity approaches
the gate from compartment B, the gatekeeper opens the gate,
and the particle passes through; but when a particle of less than
average velocity approaches from compartment A or a particle of
greater than average velocity approaches from compartment B,
the gate is closed. In this way, the concentration of particles of
high velocity is increased in compartment B and is decreased in
compartment A. This produces an apparent decrease in entropy;
so that if the two compartments are now connected by a heat
engine, we seem to obtain a perpetual-­motion machine of the
second kind.
     It is simpler to repel the question posed by the Maxwell
demon than to answer it. Nothing is easier than to deny the pos-
sibility of such beings or structures. We shall actually find that
Maxwell demons in the strictest sense cannot exist in a system in
equilibrium, but if we accept this from the beginning, and so not
try to demonstrate it, we shall miss an admirable opportunity
to learn something about entropy and about possible physical,
chemical, and biological systems.
     For a Maxwell demon to act, it must receive information
from approaching particles concerning their velocity and point
of impact on the wall. Whether these impulses involve a transfer
of energy or not, they must involve a coupling of the demon
and the gas. Now, the law of the increase of entropy applies to a
completely isolated system but does not apply to a non-­isolated
part of such a system. Accordingly, the only entropy which con-
cerns us is that of the system gas-­demon, and not that of the gas


===== PDF PAGE 132 =====

Groups and Statistical Mechanics                                 83



alone. The gas entropy is merely one term in the total entropy
of the larger system. Can we find terms involving the demon as
well which contribute to this total entropy?
   Most certainly we can. The demon can only act on informa-
tion received, and this information, as we shall see in the next
chapter, represents a negative entropy. The information must be
carried by some physical process, say some form of radiation. It
may very well be that this information is carried at a very low
energy level, and that the transfer of energy between particle
and demon is for a considerable time far less significant than the
transfer of information. However, under the quantum mechan-
ics, it is impossible to obtain any information giving the posi-
tion or the momentum of a particle, much less the two together,
without a positive effect on the energy of the particle examined,
exceeding a minimum dependent on the frequency of the light
used for examination. Thus all coupling is strictly a coupling
involving energy, and a system in statistical equilibrium is in
equilibrium both in matters concerning entropy and those con-
cerning energy. In the long run, the Maxwell demon is itself sub-
ject to a random motion corresponding to the temperature of
its environment, and, as Leibniz says of some of his monads, it
receives a large number of small impressions, until it falls into “a
certain vertigo” and is incapable of clear perceptions. In fact, it
ceases to act as a Maxwell demon.
   Nevertheless, there may be a quite appreciable interval of
time before the demon is deconditioned, and this time may
be so prolonged that we may speak of the active phase of the
demon as metastable. There is no reason to suppose that meta-
stable demons do not in fact exist; indeed, it may well be that
enzymes are metastable Maxwell demons, decreasing entropy,
perhaps not by the separation between fast and slow particles


===== PDF PAGE 133 =====

84                                                       Chapter II



but by some other equivalent process. We may well regard liv-
ing organisms, such as Man himself, in this light. Certainly the
enzyme and the living organism are alike metastable: the stable
state of an enzyme is to be deconditioned, and the stable state
of a living organism is to be dead. All catalysts are ultimately
poisoned: they change rates of reaction but not true equilibrium.
Nevertheless, catalysts and Man alike have sufficiently definite
states of metastability to deserve the recognition of these states
as relatively permanent conditions.
     I do not wish to close this chapter without indicating that
ergodic theory is a considerably wider subject than we have indi-
cated above. There are certain modern developments of ergodic
theory in which the measure to be kept invariant under a set of
transformations is defined directly by the set itself rather than
assumed in advance. I refer especially to the work of Kryloff and
Bogoliouboff, and to some of the work of Hurewicz and the Japa-
nese school.
     The next chapter is devoted to the statistical mechanics of
time series. This is another field in which the conditions are very
remote from those of the statistical mechanics of heat engines
and which is thus very well suited to serve as a model of what
happens in the living organism.


===== PDF PAGE 134 =====

III Time Series, Information, and Communication




There is a large class of phenomena in which what is observed is
a numerical quantity, or a sequence of numerical quantities, dis-
tributed in time. The temperature as recorded by a continuous
recording thermometer, or the closing quotations of a stock in
the stock market, taken day by day, or the complete set of meteo-
rological data published from day to day by the Weather Bureau
are all time series, continuous or discrete, simple or multiple.
These time series are relatively slowly changing, and are well
suited to a treatment employing hand computation or ordinary
numerical tools such as slide rules and computing machines.
Their study belongs to the more conventional parts of statistical
theory.
  What is not generally realized is that the rapidly changing
sequences of voltages in a telephone line or a television circuit
or a piece of radar apparatus belong just as truly to the field
of statistics and time series, although the apparatus by means
of which they are combined and modified must in general be
very rapid in its action, and in fact must be able to put out
results pari passu with the very rapid alterations of input. These
pieces of apparatus—­telephone receivers, wave filters, automatic
sound-­coding devices like the Vocoder of the Bell Telephone


===== PDF PAGE 135 =====

86                                                        Chapter III



Laboratories, frequency-­modulating networks and their corre-
sponding receivers—­are all in essence quick-­acting arithmetical
devices, corresponding to the whole apparatus of computing
machines and schedules, and the staff of computers, of the sta-
tistical laboratory. The ingenuity needed in their use has been
built into them in advance, just as it has into the automatic
range finders and gun pointers of an anti-­aircraft fire-­control
system, and for the same reasons. The chain of operation has to
work too fast to admit of any human links.
     One and all, time series and the apparatus to deal with them,
whether in the computing laboratory or in the telephone circuit,
have to deal with the recording, preservation, transmission, and
use of information. What is this information, and how is it mea-
sured? One of the simplest, most unitary forms of information is
the recording of a choice between two equally probable simple
alternatives, one or the other of which is bound to happen—­a
choice, for example, between heads and tails in the tossing of a
coin. We shall call a single choice of this sort a decision. If then
we ask for the amount of information in the perfectly precise
measurement of a quantity known to lie between A and B, which
may with uniform a priori probability lie anywhere in this range,
we shall see that if we put A = 0 and B = 1, and represent the
quantity in the binary scale by the infinite binary number. a1 a2
a3 ... an ..., where a1, a2, ..., each has the value 0 or 1, then the
number of choices made and the consequent amount of infor-
mation is infinite. Here

                  1      1   1          1
.a1a2 a3  an =     a1 + 2 + 2 a2 +  + n an +               (3.01)
                  2     2   2          2

     However, no measurement which we actually make is
performed with perfect precision. If the measurement has a


===== PDF PAGE 136 =====

Time Series, Information, and Communication                           87



uniformly distributed error lying over a range of length · b1 b2 ...
bn ..., where bk is the first digit not equal to 0, we shall see that all
the decisions from a1 to ak−1, and possibly to ak, are significant,
while all the later decisions are not. The number of decisions
made is certainly not far from

− log 2 . b1 b2  bn                                             (3.02)

and we shall take this quantity as the precise formula for the
amount of information and its definition.
      We may conceive this in the following way: we know a priori
that a variable lies between 0 and 1, and a posteriori that it lies on
the interval (a, b) inside (0, 1). Then the amount of information
we have from our a posteriori knowledge is

          measure of ( a, b )
− log 2                                                           (3.03)
          measure of ( 0, 1)

However, let us now consider a case where our a priori knowledge
is that the probability that a certain quantity should lie between
x and x + dx is f1(x) dx, and the a posteriori probability is f2(x)
dx. How much new information does our a posteriori probability
give us?
      This problem is essentially that of attaching a width to the
regions under the curves y = f1(x) and y = f2(x). It will be noted
that we are here assuming the variable to have a fundamental
equipartition; that is, our results will not in general be the same
if we replace x by x3 or any other function of x. Since f1(x) is a
probability density, we shall have
 ∞
∫ f ( x) dx = 1
 −∞
      1                                                           (3.04)

so that the average logarithm of the breadth of the region under
f1(x) may be considered as some sort of average of the height
of the logarithm of the reciprocal of f1(x). Thus a reasonable


===== PDF PAGE 137 =====

88                                                        Chapter III



measure1 of the amount of information associated with the
curve f1(x) is
 ∞
∫ [log f ( x)] f ( x) dx
 −∞
          2   1       1                                       (3.05)

      The quantity we here define as amount of information is the
negative of the quantity usually defined as entropy in similar
situations. The definition here given is not the one given by R. A.
Fisher for statistical problems, although it is a statistical defini-
tion; and can be used to replace Fisher’s definition in the tech-
nique of statistics.
      In particular, if f1(x) is a constant over (a, b) and is zero
elsewhere,
 ∞                                b−a       1       1
∫ [log f ( x)] f ( x) dx = b − a log b − a = log b − a
 −∞
          2   1       1                 2       2             (3.06)

      Using this to compare the information that a point is in the
region (0, 1) with the information that it is in the region (a, b),
we obtain for the measure of the difference

         1                     1
log 2       − log 2 1 = log 2                                 (3.07)
        b−a                   b−a

      The definition which we have given for the amount of infor-
mation is applicable when the variable x is replaced by a variable
ranging over two or more dimensions. In the two-­dimensional
case, f(x, y) is a function such that
 ∞       ∞
∫ dx ∫ dyf ( x, y ) = 1
 −∞      −∞
                  1                                           (3.08)

and the amount of information is
 ∞       ∞
∫ dx ∫ dyf ( x, y ) log f ( x, y )
 −∞      −∞
                  1       2   1                              (3.081)


===== PDF PAGE 138 =====

Time Series, Information, and Communication                               89



Note that f1(x, y) is of the form ϕ(x)ψ(y) and
 ∞                  ∞
∫ φ ( x) dx = ∫ ψ ( y ) dy = 1
 −∞                 −∞
                                                                     (3.082)

then
 ∞          ∞
∫ dx ∫ dyφ ( x) ψ ( y ) = 1
 −∞      −∞
                                                                     (3.083

and
 ∞          ∞
∫ dx ∫ dyf ( x, y ) log f ( x, y )
 −∞      −∞
                1            2   1
                                                                     (3.084)
        ∞                            ∞
     = ∫ dxφ ( x ) log 2 φ ( x ) + ∫ dyψ ( y ) log 2 ψ ( y )
        −∞                           −∞


and the amount of information from independent sources
is additive. An interesting problem is that of determining the
information gained by fixing one or more variables in a prob-
lem. For example, let us suppose that a variable u lies between
x and x + dx with the probability exp ( − x2 2a ) dx           2π a , while a
variable v lies between the same two limits with a probability
exp ( − x2 2b ) dx       2π b . How much information do we gain con-
cerning u if we know that u + v = w? In this case, it is clear that
u = w − v, where w is fixed. We assume the a priori distributions
of u and v to be independent. Then the a posteriori distribution
of u is proportional to

     x2      ( w − x )2                        2  a + b 
exp  −  exp  −           = c1 exp  − ( x − c2 )               (3.09)
     2a         2 b                                2ab  

where c1 and c2 are constants. They both disappear in the for-
mula for the gain in information given by the fixing of w.
      The excess of information concerning x when we know w to
be that which we have in advance is


===== PDF PAGE 139 =====

90                                                                                  Chapter III



               1
    2π [ab ( a + b )]
                      ∫
                             ∞

                             −∞   {                  2 a + b 
                                  exp  − ( x − c2 ) 
                                                       2ab     }
                   1               ab                         a + b 
            ×  − log 2 2π                 − ( x − c2 )                  
                                                          2
                                 a + b                           log 2 e  dx
                2                                           2ab           
                                                                                        (3.091)
                  1     ∞          x2    1                      x2          
                  2π a ∫−∞ 
            −                 exp  −    − log 2 2π a −               log 2 e  dx
                                    2a    2                      2a          
            1          a + b
        =     log 2       
            2           b 

Note that this expression (Eq. 3.091) is positive, and that it is
independent of w. It is one-­half the logarithm of the ratio of the
sum of the mean squares of u and v to the mean square of v. If v
has only a small range of variation, the amount of information
concerning u which a knowledge of u + v gives is large, and it
becomes infinite as b goes to 0.
         We can consider this result in the following light: let us treat
u as a message and v as a noise. Then the information carried
by a precise message in the absence of a noise is infinite. In the
presence of a noise, however, this amount of information is
finite, and it approaches 0 very rapidly as the noise increases in
intensity.
         We have said that amount of information, being the negative
logarithm of a quantity which we may consider as a probability,
is essentially a negative entropy. It is interesting to show that, on
the average, it has the properties we associate with an entropy.
         Let ϕ(x) and ψ(x) be two probability densities; then [ϕ(x) +
ψ(x)]/2 is also a probability density. Then
    ∞   φ ( x) + ψ ( x)      φ ( x) + ψ ( x)
∫   −∞         2
                        log
                                    2
                                             dx
                                                                                         (3.10)
            ∞ φ ( x)                    ∞ ψ ( x)
        ∫           log φ ( x ) dx + ∫          log ψ ( x ) dx
            −∞  2                       −∞   2
This follows from the fact that


===== PDF PAGE 140 =====

Time Series, Information, and Communication                       91



a+b     a+b 1
    log     ( a log a + b log b )                            (3.11)
 2       2  2

In other words, the overlap of the regions under ϕ(x) and ψ(x)
reduces the maximum information belonging to ϕ(x) + ψ(x). On
the other hand, if ϕ(x) is a probability density vanishing outside
(a, b),
 ∞
∫ φ ( x) log φ ( x) dx
 −∞
                                                              (3.12)

is a minimum when ϕ(x) = 1/(b − a) over (a, b) and is zero else-
where. This follows from the fact that the logarithm curve is
convex upward.
      It will be seen that the processes which lose information are,
as we should expect, closely analogous to the processes which
gain entropy. They consist in the fusion of regions of probability
which were originally distinct. For example, if we replace the
distribution of a certain variable by the distribution of a function
of that variable which takes the same value for different argu-
ments, or if in a function of several variables we allow some of
them to range unimpeded over their natural range of variability,
we lose information. No operation on a message can gain infor-
mation on the average. Here we have a precise application of the
second law of thermodynamics in communication engineering.
Conversely, the greater specification of an ambiguous situation,
on the average, will, as we have seen, generally gain information
and never lose it.
      An interesting case is when we have a probability distribu-
tion with n-­fold density f(x1, ..., xn) over the variables (x1, ...,
xn), and where we have m dependent variables y1, ..., ym. How
much information do we get by fixing these m variables? First
let them be fixed between the limits y1*, y1* + dy1*; ...; ym*, ym +


===== PDF PAGE 141 =====

92                                                                    Chapter III



dym*. Let us take as a new set of variables x1, x2, ..., xn−m, y1, y2,
..., ym. Then over the new set of variables, our distribution func-
tion will be proportional to f(x1, ..., xn) over the region R given
by y1 *  y1  y1 * + dy1 *, , ym *  ym  ym * + dym * and 0 outside.
Thus the amount of information obtained by the specification
of the y’s will be

  dx  ∫ dx f ( x ,  , x ) log f ( x ,  , x )
∫   1               n            1        n       2       1   n
    
      R

                  dx  ∫ dx f ( x , , x )
                ∫       1            n        1       n
                    
                          R

  − ∞ dx1  ∞ dxn f ( x1 ,  , xn ) log 2 f ( x1 ,  , xn ) 
  ∫−∞             ∫−∞                                           
                                        y1 *,  , y m * 
                                                              −1 
 
             ∞            ∞                                             (3.13)
          ∫ −∞
                dx1  ∫ dxn − m J 
                          −∞                                
                                        xn − m +1 ,  , xn     
                                                                
              × f ( x1 ,  , xn ) log 2 f ( x1 ,  , xn )       
=                                                    −1         
  dx  dx
    ∞            ∞            y   * ,   , y    *              
  ∫−∞ 1 ∫−∞ n − m J  xn − m +1 ,  , xn  f ( x1 ,  , xn ) 
                                 1            m


                                                                
  − ∞ dx1  ∞ dxn f ( x1 ,  , xn ) log 2 f ( x1 ,  , xn ) 
     ∫ −∞         ∫ −∞                                          
                                                               

      Closely related to this problem is the generalization of that
which we discussed in Eq. 3.13; in the case just discussed,
how much information do we have concerning the variables
x1, ..., xn−m alone? Here the a priori probability density of these
variables is
 ∞                            ∞
∫ dx      n − m +1    ∫ dxn f ( x1 ,  , xn )                            (3.14)
 −∞                           −∞

and the un-­normalized probability density after fixing the y*’s is
                                       −1
        y1 *,  , y m * 
∑ J  x                    
          n − m +1 ,  , xn 
                                            f ( x1 ,  , xn )           (3.141)


===== PDF PAGE 142 =====

Time Series, Information, and Communication                     93



where the ∑ is taken over all sets of points (xn−m+1, ..., xn) cor-
responding to a given set of y*’s. On this basis, we may easily
write down the solution to our problem, though it will be a
bit lengthy. If we take the set x1, ..., xn−m) to be a generalized
message, the set (xn−m+1, ..., xm) to be a generalized noise, and
the y*’s to be a generalized corrupted message, we see that we
have given the solution of a generalization of the problem of
Expression 3.141.
   We have thus at least a formal solution of a generalization
of the message-­noise problem which we have already stated. A
set of observations depends in an arbitrary way on a set of mes-
sages and noises with a known combined distribution. We wish
to ascertain how much information these observations give con-
cerning the messages alone. This is a central problem of commu-
nication engineering. It enables us to evaluate different systems,
such as amplitude modulation or frequency modulation or
phase modulation, as far as their efficiency in transmitting infor-
mation is concerned. This is a technical problem and not suit-
able to a detailed discussion here; however, certain remarks are
in order. In the first place, it can be shown that with the defini-
tion of information given here, with a random “static” on the
ether equidistributed in frequency as far as power is concerned,
and with a message restricted to a definite frequency range and
a definite power output for this range, no means of transmission
of information is more efficient than amplitude modulation,
although other means may be as efficient. On the other hand,
the information transmitted by this means is not necessarily in
the form most suitable for reception by the ear or by any other
given receptor. Here the specific characteristics of the ear and
of other receptors must be considered by employing a theory
very similar to the one just developed. In general, the efficient


===== PDF PAGE 143 =====

94                                                          Chapter III



use of amplitude modulation or any other form of modulation
must be supplemented by the use of decoding devices adequate
to transforming the received information into a form suitable for
reception by human receptors or use by mechanical receptors.
Similarly, the original message must be coded for the greatest
compression in transmission. This problem has been attacked,
at least in part, in the design of the “Vocoder” system by the
Bell Telephone Laboratories, and the relevant general theory has
been presented in a very satisfactory form by Dr. C. Shannon of
those laboratories.
     So much for the definition and technique of measuring
information. We shall now discuss the way in which informa-
tion may be presented in a form homogeneous in time. Let it
be noted that most of the telephone and other communication
devices are actually not attached to a particular origin in time.
There is indeed one operation which seems to contradict this,
but which really does not. This is the operation of modulation.
This, in its simplest form, converts a message f(t) into one of the
form f(t) sin (at + b). If, however, we regard the factor sin (at +
b) as an extra message which is put into the apparatus, it will be
seen that the situation will come under our general statement.
The extra message, which we call the carrier, adds nothing to the
rate at which the system is carrying information. All the infor-
mation it contains is conveyed in an arbitrarily short interval of
time, and thereafter nothing new is said.
     A message homogeneous in time, or, as the statisticians call
it, a time series which is in statistical equilibrium, is thus a single
function or a set of functions of the time, which forms one of an
ensemble of such sets with a well-­defined probability distribu-
tion, not altered by the change of t to t + τ throughout. That is,
the transformation group consisting of the operators Tλ which


===== PDF PAGE 144 =====

Time Series, Information, and Communication                          95



change f(t) into f(t + λ) leaves the probability of the ensemble
invariant. The group satisfies the properties that

                                    ( −∞ < λ < ∞ )
T λ [T µ f (t )] = T µ + λ f (t )                               (3.15)
                                    ( −∞ < µ < ∞ )

It follows from this that if Φ[f(t)] is a “functional” of f(t)—­that is,
a number depending upon the whole history of f(t)—­and if the
average of f(t) over the whole ensemble is finite, we are in a posi-
tion to use the Birkhoff ergodic theorem quoted in the previous
chapter, and to come to the conclusion that, except for a set of
values of f(t) of zero probability, the time-­average of Φ[f(t)], or in
symbols,

      1 A                           1 0
           Φ [ f (t + τ )] dτ = lim ∫ Φ [ f (t + τ )] dτ
      A ∫0
lim                                                              (3.16)
A→∞                             A→∞ A − A


exists.
    There is even more here than this. We have stated in the pre-
vious chapter another theorem of ergodic character, due to von
Neumann, which states that, except for a set of elements of zero
probability, any element belonging to a system which goes into
itself under a group of measure-­preserving transformations such
as Eq. 3.15 belongs to a sub-­set (which may be the whole set)
which goes into itself under the same transformation, which has
a measure defined over itself and also invariant under the trans-
formation, and which has the further property that any portion
of this sub-­set with measure preserved under the group of trans-
formations either has the maximum measure of the sub-­set, or
measure 0. If we discard all elements except those of such a sub-­
set, and use its appropriate measure, we shall find that the time
average (Eq. 3.16) is in almost all cases the average of Φ[f(t)] over
all the space of functions f(t); the so-­called phase average. Thus in
the case of such an ensemble of functions f(t), except in a set of


===== PDF PAGE 145 =====

96                                                          Chapter III



cases of zero probability, we can deduce the average of any statis-
tical parameter of the ensemble—­indeed we can simultaneously
deduce any countable set of such parameters of the ensemble—­
from the record of any one of the component time series, by
using a time average instead of a phase average. Moreover, we
need to know only the past of almost any one time series of the
class. In other words, given the entire history up to the present
of a time series known to belong to an ensemble in statistical
equilibrium, we can compute with probable error zero the entire
set of statistical parameters of an ensemble in statistical equilib-
rium to which that time series belongs. Up to here, we have for-
mulated this for single time series; it is equally true, however, for
multiple time series in which we have several quantities varying
simultaneously, rather than a single varying quantity.
     We are now in a position to discuss various problems belong-
ing to time series. We shall confine our attention to those cases
where the entire past of a time series can be given in terms of a
countable set of quantities. For example, for quite a wide class of
functions f(t) (−∞ < t < ∞), we have fully determined f when we
know the set of quantities
        0
an = ∫ e t t n f (t ) dt
       −∞
                           (n = 0, 1, 2,)                      (3.17)

Now let A be some function of the values of t in the future, that
is, for arguments greater than 0. Then we can determine the
simultaneous distribution of (a0, a1, ..., an, A) from the past of
almost any single time series if the set of f’s is taken in its narrow-
est possible sense. In particular, if a0, ..., an are all given, we may
determine the distribution of A. Here we appeal to the known
theorem of Nikodym on conditional probabilities. The same the-
orem will assure us that this distribution, under very general cir-
cumstances, will tend to a limit as n → ∞ and this limit will give


===== PDF PAGE 146 =====

Time Series, Information, and Communication                      97



us all the knowledge there is concerning the distribution of any
future quantity. We may similarly determine the simultaneous
distribution of values of any set of future quantities, or any set
of quantities depending both on the past and the future, when
the past is known. If then we have given any adequate interpre-
tation to the “best value” of any of these statistical parameters or
sets of statistical parameters—­in the sense, perhaps, of a mean
or a median or a mode—­we can compute it from the known dis-
tribution, and obtain a prediction to meet any desired criterion
of goodness of prediction. We can compute the merit of the pre-
diction, using any desired statistical basis of this merit—­mean
square error or maximum error or mean absolute error, and so
on. We can compute the amount of information concerning any
statistical parameter or set of statistical parameters, which fixing
of the past will give us. We can even compute the whole amount
of information which a knowledge of the past will give us of
the whole future beyond a certain point; although when this
point is the present, we shall in general know the latter from the
past, and our knowledge of the present will contain an infinite
amount of information.
   Another interesting situation is that of a multiple time series,
in which we know precisely only the pasts of some of the com-
ponents. The distribution of any quantity involving more than
these pasts can be studied by means very similar to those already
suggested. In particular, we may wish to know the distribution of
a value of another component, or a set of values of other compo-
nents, at some point of time, past, present, or future. The general
problem of the wave filter belongs to this class. We have a mes-
sage, together with a noise, combined in some way into a cor-
rupted message, of which we know the past. We also know the
statistical joint distribution of the message and the noise as time


===== PDF PAGE 147 =====

98                                                        Chapter III



series. We ask for the distribution of the values of the message at
some given time, past, present, and future. We then ask for an
operator on the past of the corrupted message which will best
give this true message, in some given statistical sense. We may
ask for a statistical estimate of some measure of the error of our
knowledge of the message. Finally, we may ask for the amount of
information which we possess concerning the message.
     There is one ensemble of time series which is particularly sim-
ple and central. This is the ensemble associated with the Brown-
ian motion. The Brownian motion is the motion of a particle in
a gas, impelled by the random impacts of the other particles in
a state of thermal agitation. The theory has been developed by
many writers, among them Einstein, Smoluchowski, Perrin, and
the author.2 Unless we go down in the time scale to intervals so
small that the individual impacts of the particles on one another
are discernible, the motion shows a curious kind of undifferen-
tiability. The mean square motion in a given direction over a
given time is proportional to the length of that time, and the
motions over successive times are completely uncorrelated. This
conforms closely to the physical observations. If we normalize
the scale of the Brownian motion to fit the time scale, and con-
sider only one coordinate x of the motion, and if we let x(t) equal
0 for t = 0, then the probability that if 0  t1  t 2    t n the
particles lie between x1 and x1 + dx1 at time t1, ..., between xn and
xn + dxn at time tn, is

     x 2 ( x − x1 )2      ( x − xn−1 )2 
exp  − 1 − 2           −− n
     2t1 2 (t 2 − t1 )    2 (t n − t n −1 ) 
                                                dx  dx
                                                  1   n       (3.18)
          (2π )n t1 (t 2 − t1 ) (t n − t n−1 )

     On the basis of the probability system corresponding to
this, which is unambiguous, we can make the set of paths


===== PDF PAGE 148 =====

Time Series, Information, and Communication                                                99



corresponding to the different possible Brownian motions
depend on a parameter α lying between 0 and 1, in such a way
that each path is a function x(t, α), where x depends on the time
t and the parameter of distribution α, and where the probability
that a path lies in a certain set S is the same as the measure of
the set of values of α corresponding to paths in S. On this basis,
almost all paths will be continuous and non-­differentiable.
     A very interesting question is that of determining the average
with respect to α of x(t1, α) ... x(tn, α). This will be
 1
∫ dα x (t , α ) x (t , α ) x (t , α )
 0
            1                  2                n


     = (2π )            [t1 (t 2 − t1 ) (t n − t n−1 )]− 2
               −n                                             1
                    2


          ∞              ∞           ξ 2 (ξ − ξ1 )2                                    (3.19)
       × ∫ dξ1  ∫ dξnξ1ξ2  ξn exp  − 1 − 2           −
          −∞            −∞
                                     2t1 2 (t 2 − t1 )
         (ξ − ξn−1 )2 
       − n                 
         2 (t n − t n −1 ) 

under the assumption that 0  t1    t n , Let us put

ξ1  ξn = ∑ Ak ξ1λk ,1 (ξ2 − ξ1 )λk ,2  (ξn − ξn −1 )λk ,n                             (3.20)

where λk,1 + λk,2 + ··· + λk,n = n. The value of the expression in Eq.
3.19 will become
                                                                                 − 12
∑ A (2π )
       k
                    −n2
                          t1λk ,1 (t 2 − t1 )λk ,2  (t n − t n −1 )λk ,n 
            ∞                          ξ2          
       × ∏ ∫ dξ ξ λk , j exp  −                    
         j
            −∞
                                2 (t j −  t j −1 ) 
               1 ∞ λk , j             ξ2 
     = ∑ Ak ∏              ξ exp  −  dξ (t j − t j −1 ) 2                             (3.21)
                                                         −1

            j  2π   ∫   −∞
                                         2    
      0 if any λk , j is odd
      
     =
      ∑
          Ak ∏ ( λk , j − 1) ( λk , j − 3) 5 ⋅ 3 ⋅ (t j − t j −1 ) 2
                                                                   −1

        k     j


===== PDF PAGE 149 =====

100                                                                               Chapter III



if every λk,j is even,

= ∑ Ak ∏ ( number of ways of dividing λk , j terms into pairs)
      k        j

     × (t j − t j −1 ) 2
                     1




= ∑ Ak ( numbers of ways of dividing n terms into pairs
      k

          whose elements both belong in the same group of
          λk , j terms into which λ is separated ) × (t j − t j −1 ) 2
                                                                          1




                           1
= ∑ Aj ∑ ∏ ∫ dα [ x (t k , α ) − x (t k −1 , α )][ x (t q , α ) − x (t q −1 , α )]
                           0
      j


Here the first ∑ sums over j; the second, over all the ways of
dividing n terms in blocks, respectively, of λk,1, ..., λk,n numbers
into pairs; and the ∏ is taken over those pairs of values k and q,
where λk,1 of the elements to be selected from tk and tq are t1, λk,2
are t2, and so on. It immediately results that
 1                                                      1
∫ dα x (t , α ) x (t , α ) x (t , α ) = ∑ ∏ ∫ dα x (t , α ) x (t , α )
 0
               1               2    n
                                                       0
                                                                  j           k

                                                                                      (3.22)

where the ∑ is taken over all partitions of t1, ..., tn into distinct
pairs, and the ∏ over all the pairs in each partition. In other
words, when we know the averages of the products of x(tj, α) by
pairs, we know the averages of all polynomials in these quanti-
ties, and thus their entire statistical distribution.
      Up to the present, we have considered Brownian motions x(t,
α) where t is positive. If we put

ξ (t , α , β ) = x (t , α ) (t  0 )
                                                                                      (3.23)
ξ (t , α , β ) = x ( −t , β ) (t < 0 )

where α and β have independent uniform distributions over (0,
1), we shall obtain a distribution of ξ(t, α, β) where t runs over


===== PDF PAGE 150 =====

Time Series, Information, and Communication                          101



the whole real infinite line. There is a well-­known mathematical
device to map a square on a line segment in such a way that area
goes into length. All we need to do is to write our coordinates in
the square in the decimal form:

α = .α1α 2  α n 
                                                                  (3.24)
β = .β1β2  βn  

and to put

γ = .α1β1α 2 β2  α n βn 
and we obtain a mapping of this sort which is one-­one for almost
all points both in the line segment and the square. Using this
substitution, we define
ξ (t , γ ) = ξ (t , α , β )                                        (3.25)

      We now wish to define
  ∞
∫ K (t ) dξ (t , γ )
 −∞
                                                                   (3.26)

The obvious thing would be to define this as a Stieltjes3 integral,
but ξ is a very irregular function of t and does not make such
a definition possible. If, however, K runs sufficiently rapidly to
0 at ± ∞ and is a sufficiently smooth function, it is reasonable
to put
  ∞                           ∞
∫ K (t ) dξ (t , γ ) = − ∫ K ′ (t ) ξ (t , γ ) dt
 −∞                           −∞
                                                                   (3.27)

Under these circumstances, we have formally
 1        ∞                        ∞
∫ dγ ∫ K (t ) dξ (t , γ )∫ K (t ) dξ (t , γ )
 0        −∞
               1
                                   −∞
                                        2

          1        ∞                        ∞
      = ∫ dγ ∫ K1 ′ (t ) ξ (t , γ ) dt ∫ K2 ′ (t ) ξ (t , γ ) dt   (3.28)
         0         −∞                       −∞
          ∞               ∞                 1
      = ∫ K1 ′ ( s) ds ∫ K2 ′ (t ) dt ∫ ξ ( s, γ ) ξ (t , γ ) dγ
         −∞              −∞                 0


Now, if s and t are of opposite signs,


===== PDF PAGE 151 =====

102                                                                          Chapter III



 1
∫ ξ ( s, γ ) ξ (t , γ ) dγ = 0
 0
                                                                                 (3.29)

while if they are of the same sign, and |s| < |t|,
 1                                   1
∫ ξ ( s, γ ) ξ (t , γ ) dγ = ∫ x ( s , α ) x ( t , α ) dα
 0                                   0

              1          ∞     ∞           u2   ( v − u )2 
     =                 ∫
         2π s ( t − s ) −∞
                           du ∫ dv uv exp  −
                               −∞
                                               −
                                           2 s 2 ( t − s )
                                                            
                                                                                 (3.30)
           1    ∞          u2 
     =
         2π s ∫ −∞
                   u2 exp  −
                           2 s 
                                   du

            1 ∞ 2         u2 
     = s
           2π ∫ −∞
                   u exp  −  du = s
                          2

Thus:
 1         ∞                             ∞
∫ dγ ∫ K (t ) dξ (t , γ )∫ K (t ) dξ (t , γ )
 0         −∞
                     1
                                     −∞
                                             2

               ∞             s                         ∞            s
     = − ∫ K1 ′ ( s) ds ∫ tK2 ′ (t ) dt − ∫ K2 ′ ( s) ds ∫ tK1 ′ (t ) dt
            0                0                         0            0
                0                0                         0            0
         + ∫ K1 ′ ( s) ds ∫ tK2 ′ (t ) dt + ∫ K2 ′ ( s) ds ∫ tK1 ′ (t ) dt
                −∞               s                         −∞           s
          ∞                            s
     = − ∫ K1 ′ ( s) ds  sK2 ( s) − ∫ K2 (t ) dt 
          0                           0            
            ∞                            s
       − ∫ K2 ′ ( s) ds  sK1 ( s) − ∫ K1 (t ) dt 
           0                           0                                       (3.31)
            0                               0
       + ∫ K1 ′ ( s) ds  − sK2 ( s) − ∫ K2 (t ) dt 
                           
            −∞                            s           
            0                               0
         + ∫ K2 ′ ( s) ds  − sK1 ( s) − ∫ K1 (t ) dt 
            −∞                            s            
               ∞                                  ∞
     = − ∫ sd [ K1 ( s) K2 ( s)] = ∫ K1 ( s) K2 ( s) ds
               −∞                                 −∞


In particular,
 1         ∞                                 ∞
∫ dγ ∫ K (t + τ ) dξ (t , γ )∫ K (t + τ ) dξ (t , γ )
 0         −∞
                         1
                                             −∞
                                                                2

           ∞                                                                     (3.32)
     = ∫ K ( s) K ( s + τ 2 − τ1 ) ds
          −∞


Moreover,


===== PDF PAGE 152 =====

Time Series, Information, and Communication                                           103



 1       n         ∞
∫ dγ ∏ ∫ K (t + τ ) dξ (t , γ )
 0                 −∞
                             k
        k =1                                                                        (3.33)
                        ∞
     = ∑ ∏ ∫ K ( s) K ( s + τ j − τ k ) ds
                        −∞


where the sum is over all partitions of τl, ..., τn into pairs, and the
product is over the pairs in each partition.
      The expression
 ∞
∫ K (t + τ ) dξ (τ , γ ) = f (t , γ )
 −∞
                                                                                    (3.34)

represents a very important ensemble of time series in the vari-
able t, depending on a parameter of distribution γ. We have just
shown what amounts to the statement that all the moments and
hence all the statistical parameters of this distribution depend
on the function
                   ∞
Φ (τ ) = ∫ K ( s) K ( s + τ ) ds
               −∞
                   ∞                                                                (3.35)
        = ∫ K ( s + t ) K ( s + t + τ ) ds
               −∞


which is the statisticians’ autocorrelation function with lag τ.
Thus the statistics of distribution of f(t, γ) are the same as the
statistics of f(t + t1, γ); and it can be shown in fact that, if

f (t + t1 , γ ) = f (t , Γ )                                                        (3.36)

then the transformation of γ into Γ preserves measure. In other
words, our time series f(t, γ) is in statistical equilibrium.
      Moreover, if we consider the average of
                                 m                             n
 ∞ K (t − τ ) dξ (t , γ )  ∞ K (t + σ − τ ) dξ (t , γ )
 ∫−∞                      ∫−∞
                                                                                    (3.37)
                                                          

it will consist of precisely the terms in
 1             ∞                     m   1    ∞                                 n

∫ dγ  ∫ K (t − τ ) dξ (t , γ ) ∫ dγ  ∫ K (t + σ − τ ) dξ (t , γ )
 0           −∞                          0    −∞
                                                                                    (3.38)


===== PDF PAGE 153 =====

104                                                                       Chapter III



together with a finite number of terms involving as factors
powers of
 ∞
∫ K (σ + τ ) K (τ ) dτ
 −∞
                                                                              (3.39)

and if this approaches 0 when σ → ∞, Expression 3.38 will
be the limit of Expression ‘3.37 under these circumstances.
In other words, f(t, γ) and f(t + σ, γ) are asymptotically indepen-
dent in their distributions as σ → ∞. By a more generally phrased
but entirely similar argument, it may be shown that the simul-
taneous distribution of f(t1, γ), ..., f(tn, γ) and of f(σ + s1, γ), ...,
f(σ + sm, γ) tends to the joint distribution of the first and the
second set as σ → ∞. In other words, any bounded measurable
functional or quantity depending on the entire distribution of
the values of the function of t, f(t, γ), which we may write in the
form  [ f (t, γ )], must have the property that

                                                 {∫  [f (t , γ )] dγ }
       1                                             1                2
lim ∫  [ f (t , γ )]  [ f (t + σ , γ )] dγ =                                (3.40)
σ →∞   0                                             0


If now  [ f (t, γ )] is invariant under a translation of t, and only
takes on the values 0 or 1, we shall have
 1                       1
∫  [ f (t , γ )] dγ = ∫ { [ f (t , γ )] dγ }
                                                 2
                                                                              (3.41)
 0                      0


so that the transformation group of f(t, γ) into f(t + σ, γ) is metri-
cally transitive. It follows that if  [ f (t, γ )] is any integrable func-
tional of f as a function of t, then by the ergodic theorem

 1                            1   T
∫  [ f (t , γ )] dγ = lim T ∫  [ f (t , γ )] dt
 0                     T →∞       0
                                                                              (3.42)
                            1 0
                                    [ f (t , γ )] dt
                       T →∞ T ∫− T
                    = lim

for all values of γ except for a set of zero measure. That is, we can
almost always read off any statistical parameter of such a time


===== PDF PAGE 154 =====

Time Series, Information, and Communication                         105



series, and indeed any denumerable set of statistical parameters,
from the past history of a single example. Actually, for such a
time series,
when we know

       1 0
              f (t , γ ) f (t − τ , γ ) dt
       T ∫− T
lim                                                               (3.43)
T →∞


we know Φ(t) in almost every case, and we have a complete sta-
tistical knowledge of the time series.
     There are certain quantities dependent on a time series of this
sort which have quite interesting properties. In particular, it is
interesting to know the average of
             ∞
exp i ∫ K (t ) dξ (t , γ )                                    (3.44)
      −∞                    

Formally, this may be written
         ∞
 1            in    ∞                     n

∫ dγ ∑ n !  ∫ K (t ) dξ (t , γ )
 0
        n=0
                   −∞


        ( −1)m ∞
                   {                      }
                                  m
     =∑         ∫    [ K (t )]2 dt (2m − 1) (2m − 3) 5 ⋅ 3 ⋅ 1
      m (2m ) !
                  −∞
                                                                  (3.45)

              2 m! {                      }
        ( −1)m ∞                  m
     =∑ m       ∫−∞ [ K (t )] dt
                              2

        m


     = exp −     { ∫ [ ( )] }
                   1 ∞
                   2 −∞
                        K t
                                 2
                                     dt

     It is a very interesting problem to try to build up a time series
as general as possible from the simple Brownian motion series.
In such constructions, the example of the Fourier developments
suggests that such expansions as Expression 3.44 are convenient
building blocks for this purpose. In particular, let us investigate
time series of the special form


===== PDF PAGE 155 =====

106                                                                             Chapter III



 b                        ∞
∫ dλ exp i ∫ K (t + τ , λ ) dξ (τ , γ )
 a                        −∞
                                                                                    (3.46)

Let us suppose that we know ξ(τ, γ) as well as Expression 3.46.
Then, as in Eq. 3.45, if t1 > t2,
 1
∫ dγ exp {is [ξ (t , γ ) − ξ (t , γ )]}
 0
                               1         2

                  b                 ∞
       × ∫ d λ exp i ∫ K (t + τ , λ ) dξ (t , γ )
          a          −∞                            
        b         1     ∞                           s2         t1            
     = ∫ d λ exp  − ∫ [ K (t + τ , λ )] dt − (t 2 − t1 ) − s ∫ K (t , λ ) dt 
                                          2
        a
                  2    −∞                            2        t 2
                                                                              
                                                                                    (3.47)

     If we now multiply by exp[s2(t2 − t1)/2], let s(t2 − t1) = iσ, and
let t2 → t1, we obtain

 b
                      {   1    ∞
∫ dλ exp − 2 ∫ [ K (t + τ , λ )] dt − iσ K (t , λ )
 a                             −∞
                                              2
                                                            1    }                  (3.48)

     Let us take K(t1, λ) and a new independent variable µ and
solve for λ, obtaining

λ = Q (t1 , µ )                                                                     (3.49)

Then Expression 3.48 becomes

                          ∂Q (t1 , µ )         1 ∞
                                       exp  − ∫ {K [t + τ , Q (t1 , µ )]} dt 
 K (t1 ,b )
∫ ( ) e µσ d µi                                                            2
                                                                                    (3.50)
 K t1 ,a                     dµ               2 −∞                             

From this, by a Fourier transformation, we can determine

∂Q (t1 , µ )         1 ∞
             exp  − ∫ {K [t + τ , Q (t1 , µ )]} dt 
                                                 2
                                                                                    (3.51)
   dµ              2 −∞                              

as a function of µ, when µ, lies between K(t1, a) and K(t1, b). If we
integrate this function with respect to µ, we determine

 λ
                      {   1    ∞
∫ dλ exp − 2 ∫ [ K (t + τ , λ )] dt
 a                             −∞
                                              2
                                                  }                                 (3.52)


===== PDF PAGE 156 =====

Time Series, Information, and Communication                     107



as a function of K(t1, λ) and t1. That is, there is a known function
F(u, v), such that

 λ
              {   1    ∞
                                              }
∫ dλ exp − 2 ∫ [ K (t + τ , λ )] dt = F [ K (t , λ ) , t ]
 a                    −∞
                                        2
                                                  1       1   (3.53)


Since the left-­hand side of this equation does not depend on t1,
we may write it G(λ), and put

F [ K (t1 , λ ) , t1 ] = G ( λ )                              (3.54)

Here, F is a known function, and we can invert it with respect to
the first argument, and put

K (t1 , λ ) = H [G ( λ ) , t1 ]                               (3.55)

where it is also a known function. Then

                        1 ∞
G ( λ ) = ∫ d λ exp  − ∫ {H [G ( λ ) , t + τ ]} dt 
           λ                                     2
                                                              (3.56)
           a          2 −∞                           

Then the function

exp −{ ∫ [ ( )] } ( )
          1 ∞
          2 −∞i
                H u, t
                               2
                                   dt = R u                   (3.57)


will be a known function, and

dG
   = R (G )                                                   (3.58)
dλ

That is,

 dG
       = dλ                                                   (3.59)
R (G )

or

         dG
λ=∫            + const = S (G ) + const                       (3.60)
        R (G )


===== PDF PAGE 157 =====

108                                                         Chapter III



This constant will be given by

G (a ) = 0                                                      (3.61)

or

a = S ( 0 ) + const                                             (3.62)

It is easy to see that if a is finite, it does not matter what value we
give it; for our operator is not changed if we add a constant to all
values of λ. We can hence make it 0. We have thus determined
λ as a function of G, and thus G as a function of λ. Thus, by Eq.
3.55, we have determined K(t, λ). To finish the determination of
Expression 3.46, we need only know b. This can be determined,
however, by a comparison of

 b
             {   1   ∞
∫ dλ exp − 2 ∫ [ K (t , λ )] dt
 a                   −∞
                                 2
                                      }                         (3.63)


with
 1      b                 ∞
∫ dγ ∫ dλ exp i ∫ K (t , λ ) dξ (t , γ )
 0     a                  −∞
                                                                (3.64)

Thus, under certain circumstances which remain to be definitely
formulated, if a time series may be written in the form of Expres-
sion 3.46 and we know ξ(t, γ) as well, we can determine the func-
tion K(t, λ) in Expression 3.46 and the numbers a and b, except
for an undetermined constant added to a, λ, and b. There is no
extra difficulty if b = +∞, and it is not hard to extend the reason-
ing to the case where a = −∞. Of course, a good deal of work
remains to be done to discuss the problem of the inversion of
the functions inverted when the results are not single-­valued,
and the general conditions of validity of the expansions con-
cerned. Still, we have at least taken a first step toward the solu-
tion of the problem of reducing a large class of time series to


===== PDF PAGE 158 =====

Time Series, Information, and Communication                       109



a canonical form, and this is most important for the concrete
formal application of the theories of prediction and of the mea-
surement of information, as we have sketched them earlier in
this chapter.
      There is still one obvious limitation which we should remove
from this approach to the theory of time series: the necessity
which we are under of knowing ξ(t, γ) as well as the time series
which we are expanding in the form of Expression 3.46. The
question is: under what circumstances can we represent a time
series of known statistical parameters as determined by a Brown-
ian motion; or at least as the limit in some sense or other of
time series determined by Brownian motions? We shall confine
ourselves to time series with the property of metrical transitiv-
ity, and with the even stronger property that if we take inter-
vals of fixed length but remote in time, the distributions of any
functionals of the segments of the time series in these intervals
approach independence as the intervals recede from eachother.4
The theory to be developed here has already been sketched by
the author.
      If K(t) is a sufficiently continuous function, it is possible to
show that the zeros of
 ∞
∫ K (t + τ ) dξ (τ , γ )
 −∞
                                                               (3.65)

almost always have a definite density, by a theorem of M. Kac,
and that this density can be made as great as we wish by a proper
choice of K. Let KD be so selected that this density is D. Then the
                           ∞
sequence of zeros of ∫ K D (t + τ ) dξ (τ , γ ) from −∞ to ∞ will be
                           −∞
called Zn(D, γ), −∞ < n < ∞. Of course, in the numeration of these
zeros, n is determined except for an additive constant integer.


===== PDF PAGE 159 =====

110                                                           Chapter III



      Now, let T(t, μ) be any time series in the continuous variable t,
while μ is a parameter of distribution of the time series, varying
uniformly over (0, 1). Then let

TD (t , µ γ ) = T [t − Zn ( D, γ ) , µ ]                           (3.66)

where the Zn taken is the one just preceding t. It will be seen that
for any finite set of values t1, t2, ..., tv of x the simultaneous distri-
bution of TD(tκ, μ, γ) (κ = 1, 2, ..., v) will approach the simultane-
ous distribution of T(tκ, μ) for the same tκ’s as D → ∞, for almost
every value of μ. However, TD(t, μ, γ) is completely determined
by t, μ, D, and ξ(τ, γ). It is therefore not inappropriate to try to
express TD(t, μ, γ), for a given D and a given μ, either directly
in the form of Expression 3.46 or in some way or another as a
time series which has a distribution which is a limit (in the loose
sense just given) of distributions of this form.
      It must be admitted that this is a program to be carried through
in the future, rather than one which we can consider as already
accomplished. Nevertheless, it is the program which, in the
opinion of the author, offers the best hope for a rational, consis-
tent treatment of the many problems associated with non-­linear
prediction, non-­linear filtering, the evaluation of the transmis-
sion of information in non-­linear situations, and the theory of
the dense gas and turbulence. Among these problems are per-
haps the most pressing facing communication engineering.
      Let us now come to the prediction problem for time series
of the form of Eq. 3.34. We see that the only independent sta-
tistical parameter of the time series is Φ(t), as given by Eq. 3.35;
which means that the only significant quantity connected with
K(t) is
 ∞
∫ K ( s) K ( s + t ) ds
 −∞
                                                                   (3.67)


===== PDF PAGE 160 =====

Time Series, Information, and Communication                     111



Here of course K is real.
   Let us put
           ∞
K ( s) = ∫ k (ω ) e iω s dω                                   (3.68)
           −∞


employing a Fourier transformation. To know K(s) is to know
k(ω), and vice versa. Then

 1 ∞                            ∞

2π ∫−∞
       K ( s) K ( s + τ ) ds = ∫ k (ω ) k ( −ω ) e iωτ dω     (3.69)
                                −∞


   Thus a knowledge of Φ(τ) is tantamount to a knowledge of
k(ω)k(−ω). Since, however, K(s) is real,
           ∞
K ( s) = ∫ k (ω )e − iω s dω                                  (3.70)
           −∞


whence k(ω) = k(−ω). Thus |k(ω)|2 is a known function, which
means that the real part of log |k(ω)| is a known function.
   If we write

F (ω ) =  {log [ k (ω )]}                                    (3.71)

then the determination of K(s) is equivalent to the determina-
tion of the imaginary part of log k(ω). This problem is not deter-
minate unless we put some further restriction on k(ω). The type
of restriction which we shall put is that log k(s) shall be analytic
and of a sufficiently small rate of growth for ω in the upper half-­
plane. In order to make this restriction, k(ω) and [k(ω)−1 will be
assumed to be of algebraic growth on the real axis. Then [F(ω)]2
will be even and at most logarithmically infinite, and the Cau-
chy principal value of

           1 ∞ F (u )
           π ∫−∞ u − ω
G (ω ) =               du                                     (3.72)


===== PDF PAGE 161 =====

112                                                             Chapter III



will exist. The transformation indicated by Eq. 3.72, known as
the Hilbert transformation, changes cos λω into sin λω and sin
λω into −cos λω. Thus F(ω) + iG(ω) is a function of the form
 ∞
∫ e λω d [ M (λ )]
 0
      i
                                                                    (3.73)

and satisfies the required conditions for log |k(ω)| in the lower
half-­plane. If we now put

k (ω ) = exp [ F (ω ) + iG (ω )]                                    (3.74)

it can be shown that k(ω) is a function which, under very general
conditions, is such that K(s), as defined in Eq. 3.68, vanishes for
all negative arguments. Thus
                ∞
f (t , γ ) = ∫ K (t + τ ) dξ (τ , γ )                               (3.75)
                −t


On the other hand, it can be shown that we may write 1/k(ω) in
the form
          ∞
lim ∫ e iλω dN n ( λ )                                              (3.76)
n→∞       0


where the Nn’s are properly determined; and that this can be
done in such a way that
                          τ    ∞
ξ (τ , γ ) = lim ∫ dt ∫ Q n (t + σ ) f (σ , γ ) dσ                  (3.77)
               n→∞        0    −t


Here the Qn’s must have the formal property that
                          ∞              ∞
f (t , γ ) = lim ∫ K (t + τ ) dτ ∫ Q n (τ + σ ) f (σ , γ ) dσ       (3.78)
               n→∞        −t             −t


In general, we shall have
                     ∞              ∞
ψ (t ) = lim ∫ K (t + τ ) dτ ∫ Q n (τ + σ ) ψ (σ ) dσ               (3.79)
              n→∞    −t             −t


or if we write (as in Eq. 3.68)


===== PDF PAGE 162 =====

Time Series, Information, and Communication                          113



                   ∞
    K ( s) = ∫ k (ω ) e iω s dω
                  −∞
                   ∞
Q n ( s) = ∫ qn (ω ) e iω s dω                                     (3.80)
                  −∞
                   ∞
 ψ ( s) = ∫ Ψ (ω ) e iω s dω
                  −∞


then

Ψ (ω ) = lim (2π ) 2 Ψ (ω ) qn ( −ω ) k (ω )
                                 3
                                                                   (3.81)
                 n→∞


        Thus

                                      1
lim qn ( −ω ) =                                                    (3.82)
                        (2π ) 2 k (ω )
                                      3
n→∞



We shall find this result useful in getting the operator of predic-
tion into a form concerning frequency rather than time.
        Thus the past and present of ξ(t, γ), or properly of the “dif-
ferential” dξ(t, ξ), determine the past and present of f(t, γ), and
vice versa.
        Now, if A > 0,
                            ∞
f (t + A, γ ) = ∫                     K (t + A + τ ) dξ (τ , γ )
                            −t − A
                            −t
                       =∫             K (t + A + τ ) dξ (τ , γ )   (3.83)
                            −t − A
                                 ∞
                        + ∫ K (t + A + τ ) dξ (τ , γ )
                                 −t


Here the first term of the last expression depends on a range of
dξ(τ, λ) of which a knowledge of f(σ, γ) for σ  t tells us nothing,
and is entirely independent of the second term. Its mean square
value is
    t                                           A
∫   −t − A
             [ K (t + A + τ )]2 dτ = ∫0 [ K (τ )]2 dτ              (3.84)


===== PDF PAGE 163 =====

114                                                                Chapter III



and this tells us all there is to know about it statistically. It may
be shown to have a Gaussian distribution with this mean square
value. It is the error of the best possible prediction of f(t + A, γ).
      The best possible prediction itself is the last term of Eq. 3.83,
 ∞
∫ k (t + A + τ ) dξ (τ , γ )
 −t
                    ∞                     ∞
                                                                       (3.85)
      = lim ∫ k (t + A + τ ) dτ ∫ Q n (τ + σ ) f (σ , γ ) dσ
        n→∞      −t                       −τ


If we now put

                 1 ∞
                2π ∫0
kA (ω ) =             K (t + A) e − iωt dt                             (3.86)

and if we apply the operator of Eq. 3.85 to etωt, obtaining
         ∞                          ∞
lim ∫ K (t + A + τ ) dτ ∫ Q n (τ + σ ) e iωσ dσ = A (ω ) e iγ wt       (3.87)
n→∞     −t                          −τ


we shall find out (somewhat as in Eq. 3.81) that

A (ω ) = lim (2π ) 2 qn ( −ω ) kA (ω )
                             3

               n→∞

             = kA (ω ) k (ω )                                          (3.88)
                  1        ∞                   ∞
             =
               2π k (ω ) ∫ A
                             e − iω (t − A)dt ∫ k (u ) e iut du
                                               −∞



This is then the frequency form of the best prediction operator.
      The problem of filtering in the case of time series such as Eq.
3.34 is very closely allied to the prediction problem. Let our mes-
sage plus noise be of the form
                         ∞
m (t ) + n(t ) = ∫ K (τ ) dξ (t − τ , γ )                              (3.89)
                        0


and let the message be of the form
                ∞                              ∞
m (t ) = ∫ Q (τ ) dξ (t − τ , γ ) + ∫ R (τ ) dξ (t − τ , δ )           (3.90)
               −∞                              −∞


===== PDF PAGE 164 =====

Time Series, Information, and Communication                                  115



where γ and δ are distributed independently over (0, 1). Then the
predictable part of the m(t + a) is clearly
 ∞
∫ Q (τ + a ) dξ (t − τ , γ )
 0
                                                                         (3.901)

and the mean square error of prediction is
 a                        ∞
∫ [ Q ( τ ) ] dτ + ∫ [ R ( τ ) ] dτ
           2                       2
                                                                         (3.902)
 −∞                       −∞


Furthermore, let us suppose that we know the following
quantities:
           1         1
φ22 (t ) = ∫ dγ ∫ dδ n (t + τ ) n (τ )
           0         0
           ∞
       = ∫ [ K ( t + τ ) − Q ( t + τ ) ] [ K ( τ ) − Q ( τ ) ] dτ
           −∞
           ∞
       = ∫ [ K ( t + τ ) − Q ( t + τ ) ] [ K ( τ ) − Q ( τ ) ] dτ
           0
                0
          + ∫ [ K ( t + τ ) − Q ( t + τ ) ] [ − Q ( τ ) ] dτ             (3.903)
                −t
                −t                               ∞
          +∫         Q ( t + τ ) Q ( τ ) dτ + ∫ R ( t + τ ) R ( τ ) dτ
                −∞                               −∞
           ∞                               ∞
       = ∫ K ( t + τ ) K ( τ ) d τ − ∫ K ( t + τ ) Q ( τ ) dτ
           0                               −t
                ∞                                ∞
          + ∫ Q ( t + τ ) Q ( τ ) dτ + ∫ R ( t + τ ) R ( τ ) dτ
                −∞                               −∞


           1          1
φ11 (τ ) = ∫ dγ ∫ dδ m ( t + τ ) m (τ )
           0         0
            ∞                               ∞
                                                                         (3.904)
        = ∫ Q ( t + τ ) Q ( τ ) dτ + ∫ R ( t + τ ) R ( τ ) d τ
           −∞                               −∞

           1          1
φ12 (τ ) = ∫ dγ ∫ dδ m (t + τ ) n (τ )
           0         0
           1          1
        = ∫ dγ ∫ dδ m (t + τ ) [ m (τ ) + n (τ )] − φ11 (τ )
           0         0
           1          ∞                               ∞
        = ∫ dγ ∫ K (σ + t ) dξ (τ − σ , γ )∫ Q (τ ) dξ (τ − σ , γ ) − φ11 (τ )
           0         −t                               −t
            ∞
        = ∫ K (t + τ ) Q (τ ) dτ − φ11 (τ )
           −t
                                                                         (3.905)


===== PDF PAGE 165 =====

116                                                                  Chapter III



    The Fourier transforms of these three quantities are, respec-
tively,

Φ22 (ω ) = k (ω ) 2 + q (ω ) − q (ω ) k (ω ) − k (ω ) q (ω ) + r (ω ) 2 
                                   2

                                                                        
Φ11 (ω ) = q (ω ) + r (ω ) 2
                  2
                                                                          (3.906)
                                                                         
Φ12 (ω ) = k (ω ) q (ω ) − q (ω ) − r (ω )
                                 2
                                                                         
    where

          1 ∞
                K ( s) e − iω s ds 
         2π ∫0
k (ω ) =
                                    
          1 ∞                       
         2π ∫−∞
q (ω ) =        Q  ( s )e − iω s
                                 ds                                    (3.907)
                                    
          1 ∞                       
         2π ∫−∞
r (ω ) =        R ( s ) e − iω s
                                 ds 

That is,

Φ11 (ω ) + Φ12 (ω ) + Φ12 (ω ) + Φ22 (ω ) = k (ω ) 2                    (3.908)

and

q (ω ) k (ω ) = Φ11 (ω ) + Φ21 (ω )                                     (3.909)

where for symmetry we write Φ21 (ω ) = Φ12 (ω ). We can now deter-
mine k(ω) from Eq. 3.908, as we have defined k(ω) before on the
basis of Eq. 3.74. Here we put Φ(t) for Φ11 (t ) + Φ22 (t ) + 2  [Φ12 (t )].
This will give us

           Φ11 (ω ) + Φ21 (ω )
q (ω ) =                                                                (3.910)
                 k (ω )

Hence
             ∞    Φ11 (ω ) + Φ21 (ω ) iωt
Q (t ) = ∫                           e dω                               (3.911)
             −∞         k (ω )

and thus the best determination of m(t), with the least mean
square error, is


===== PDF PAGE 166 =====

Time Series, Information, and Communication                                  117



 ∞                    ∞    Φ11 (ω ) + Φ21 (ω ) iω (t + a)
∫ dξ (t − τ , γ ) ∫
 0                    −∞         k (ω )
                                              e           dω             (3.912)


Combining this with Eq. 3.89, and using an argument similar to
the one by which we obtained Eq. 3.88, we see that the operator
on m(t) + n(t) by which we obtain the “best” representation of
m(t + a), if we write it on the frequency scale, is

   1        ∞                    ∞ Φ11 (u ) + Φ 21 (u )

2π k (ω ) ∫a
              e − iω (t − a)dt ∫
                                 −∞      k (u )
                                                        e iut du         (3.913)

      This operator constitutes a characteristic operator of what
electrical engineers know as a wave filter. The quantity a is the
lag of the filter. It may be either positive or negative; when it is
negative, −a is known as the lead. The apparatus corresponding
to Expression 3.913 may always be constructed with as much
accuracy as we like. The details of its construction are more for
the specialist in electrical engineering than for the reader of this
book. They may be found elsewhere.5
      The mean square filtering error (Expression 3.902) may be
represented as the sum of the mean square filtering error for
infinite lag:
 ∞                                    ∞
∫ [ R ( τ ) ] d τ = Φ ( 0 ) − ∫ [ Q ( τ ) ] dτ
              2                                 2
                           11
 −∞                                  −∞
                                                                   2
          1 ∞                  1 ∞ Φ11 (ω ) + Φ21 (ω )
         2π ∫−∞               2π ∫−∞
     =          Φ11 (ω ) dω −                          dω
                                         k (ω )
          1 ∞                       Φ11 (ω ) + Φ21 (ω ) 2            
     =      ∫  
         2π −∞ 
                Φ11 (ω ) −
                           Φ11 (ω ) + Φ12 (ω ) + Φ21 (ω ) + Φ22 (ω ) 
                                                                        dω

                         Φ11 (ω ) Φ12 (ω )
        1 ∞              Φ21 (ω ) Φ22 (ω )
       2π ∫−∞ Φ11 (ω ) + Φ12 (ω ) + Φ21 (ω ) + Φ22 (ω )
     =                                                  dω

                                                                         (3.914)

and a part dependent on the lag:


===== PDF PAGE 167 =====

118                                                           Chapter III



                                                          2
 a                   a      ∞   Φ11 (ω ) + Φ21 (ω ) iωt
∫−∞ [Q (τ )] dt = ∫−∞ dt ∫−∞
            2
                                                   e dω         (3.915)
                                      k (ω )

It will be seen that the mean square error of filtering is a mono-
tonely decreasing function of lag.
      Another question which is interesting in the case of messages
and noises derived from the Brownian motion is the matter of
rate of transmission of information. Let us consider for simplic-
ity the case where the message and the noise are incoherent,
that is, when

Φ12 (ω ) ≡ Φ21 (ω ) ≡ 0                                         (3.916)

In this case, let us consider
          ∞
m (t ) = ∫ M (τ ) dξ (t − τ , γ )
          −∞
          ∞                                                    (3.917)
n (t ) = ∫ N (τ ) dξ (t − τ , δ ) 
          −∞


where γ and δ are distributed independently. Let us suppose we
know m(t) + n(t) over (−A, A); how much information do we
have concerning m(t)? Note that we should heuristically expect
that it would not be very different from the amount of informa-
tion concerning
 A
∫ M (τ ) dξ (t − τ , γ )
 −A
                                                                (3.918)

which we have when we know all values of
 A                              A
∫ M (τ ) dξ (t − τ , γ ) + ∫ N (τ ) dξ (t − τ , δ )
 −A                          −A
                                                                (3.919)

where γ and δ have independent distributions. It can, however,
be shown that the nth Fourier coefficient of Expression 3.918
has a Gaussian distribution independent of all the other Fourier
coefficients, and that its mean square value is proportional to


===== PDF PAGE 168 =====

Time Series, Information, and Communication                                   119



                               2
  A
                  π nτ 
∫− A M (τ ) exp  i A  dτ                                            (3.920)


Thus, by Eq. 3.09, the total amount of information available
concerning M is
                                              2                           2
                 A
                                 π nτ        A
                                                              π nτ 
 ∞
        1       ∫− A M (τ ) exp  i A  dτ + ∫− A N (τ ) exp  i A  dτ
∑ 2 log     2                                                   2
                                    A
                                                    π nτ 
                                   ∫− A N (τ ) exp  i A  dτ
n =−∞


                                                                        (3.921)

and the time density of communication of energy is this quan-
tity divided by 2A. If now A → ∞, Expression 3.921 approaches
                     ∞                       2     ∞                2

 1 ∞            ∫−∞ M (τ ) exp iuτ dτ + ∫−∞ N (τ ) exp iuτ dτ
2π ∫−∞
       du log 2                                  2
                                                                        (3.922)
                               ∞
                             ∫ N (τ ) exp iuτ dτ
                                        −∞


This is precisely the result which the author and Shannon have
already obtained for the rate of transmission of information in
this case. As will be seen, it depends not only on the width of the
frequency band available for transmitting the message but also
on the noise level. As a matter of fact, it has a close relation to
the audiograms used to measure the amount of hearing and loss
of hearing in a given individual. Here the abscissa is frequency,
the ordinate of lower boundary is the logarithm of the inten-
sity of the threshold of audible intensity—­what we may call the
logarithm of the intensity of the internal noise of the receiving
system—­and the upper boundary, the logarithm of the intensity
of the greatest message the system is suited to handle. The area
between them, which is a quantity of the dimension of Expres-
sion 3.922, is then taken as a measure of the rate of transmission
of information with which the ear is competent to cope.


===== PDF PAGE 169 =====

120                                                      Chapter III



   The theory of messages depending linearly on the Brownian
motion has many important variants. The key formulae are Eqs.
3.88 and 3.914 and Expression 3.922, together, of course, with
the definitions necessary to interpret these. There are a number
of variants of this theory. First: the theory gives us the best pos-
sible design of predictors and of wave filters in the case in which
the messages and the noises represent the response of linear res-
onators to Brownian motions; but in much more general cases,
they represent a possible design for predictors and filters. This
will not be an absolute best possible design, but it will minimize
the mean square error of prediction and filtering, in so far as this
can be done with apparatus performing linear operations. How-
ever, there will generally be some non-­linear apparatus which
gives a performance still better than that of any linear apparatus.
   Next, the time series here have been simple time series, in
which a single numerical variable depends on the time. There
are also multiple time series, in which a number of such vari-
ables depend simultaneously on the time; and it is these which
are of greatest importance in economics, meteorology, and the
like. The complete weather map of the United States, taken from
day to day, constitutes such a time series. In this case, we have
to develop a number of functions simultaneously in terms of the
frequency, and the quadratic quantities such as Eq. 3.35 and the
|k(ω)|2 of the arguments following Eq. 3.70 are replaced by arrays
of pairs of quantities—­that is, matrices. The problem of deter-
mining k(ω) in terms of |k(ω)|2, in such a way as to satisfy cer-
tain auxiliary conditions in the complex plane, becomes much
more difficult, especially as the multiplication of matrices is not
a permutable operation. However, the problems involved in this
multidimensional theory have been solved, at least in part, by
Krein and the author.


===== PDF PAGE 170 =====

Time Series, Information, and Communication                          121



   The multidimensional theory represents a complication of
the one already given. There is another closely related theory
which is a simplification of it. This is the theory of prediction,
filtering, and amount of information in discrete time series.
Such a series is a sequence of functions fn(α) of a parameter a,
where n runs over all integer values from −∞ to ∞. The quantity
a is as before the parameter of distribution, and may be taken to
run uniformly over (0, 1). The time series is said to be in statisti-
cal equilibrium when the change of n to n + ν (ν an integer) is
equivalent to a measure-­preserving transformation into itself of
the interval (0, 1) over which α runs.
   The theory of discrete time series is simpler in many respects
than the theory of the continuous series. It is much easier, for
instance, to make them depend on a sequence of independent
choices. Each term (in the mixing case) will be representable as a
combination of the previous terms with a quantity independent
of all previous terms, distributed uniformly over (0, 1), and the
sequence of these independent factors may be taken to replace
the Brownian motion which is so important in the continuous
case.
   If fn(α) is a time series in statistical equilibrium, and it is metri-
cally transitive, its autocorrelation coefficient will be
         1
φm = ∫ f m (α ) f 0 (α ) dα                                     (3.923)
         0


and we shall have

              1 N
φm = lim
        N →∞ N + 1
                   ∑0 f k +m (α ) f k (α )
                                                                (3.924)
              1 N
    = lim
        N →∞ N + 1
                   ∑0 f − k +m (α ) f − k (α )
for almost all α. Let us put


===== PDF PAGE 171 =====

122                                                         Chapter III



        1 π
       2π ∫−π
φn =          Φ (ω ) e inω dω                                  (3.925)

or
                   ∞
Φ (ω ) = ∑ φn e − inω                                          (3.926)
                   −∞


Let
               ∞
1
  log Φ (ω ) = ∑ pn cos nω                                     (3.927)
2              −∞


and let
                        ∞
                   p0
G (ω ) =              + ∑ pn e inω                             (3.928)
                   2    1


Let

e G(ω ) = k (ω )                                               (3.929)

Then under very general conditions, k(ω) will be the boundary
value on the unit circle of a function without zeros or singulari-
ties inside the unit circle if ω is the angle. We shall have

k (ω ) = Φ (ω )
           2
                                                               (3.930)

If now we put for the best linear prediction of fn(α) with a lead
of ν
 ∞

∑ f ν (α ) Wν
 0
      n−                                                       (3.931)

we shall find that
 ∞                                   ∞
                           1                     π
∑ Wµ e µω = 2π k (ω ) µ∑ν e ω (µ ν ) ∫ π k (u) e µ du
 0
               i

                                     =
                                         i   −
                                                 −
                                                     −i u
                                                               (3.932)


This is the analogue of Eq. 3.88. Let us note that if we put


===== PDF PAGE 172 =====

Time Series, Information, and Communication                               123



        1 π
       2π ∫−π
kµ =          k (u ) e − iµu du                                        (3.933)

then
                                  ∞

 ∞                             ∑ν kµ e µω  i


∑ Wµ e     iµω
                 =e   − iνω
                                  ∞
 0
                               ∑ kµ e µω
                                  0
                                           i


                                ν −1
                                                                       (3.934)
                                             
                              ∑     kµ e iµω
                                              
                 = e − iνω 1 − ∞ν            
                           
                             ∑0 kµ eiµω 
It will clearly be the result of the way we have formed k(ω) that
in a very general set of cases we can put
         ∞
  1
       = ∑ qµ e iµω                                                    (3.935)
k (ω )   0


Then Eq. 3.934 becomes
 ∞                                    ν −1                 ∞
                                                                  
∑ Wµ e µω = e νω 1 − ∑ kµ e µω ∑ qλ e λω 
 0
           i          −i

                                       0
                                                   i

                                                           0
                                                               i
                                                                       (3.936)

In particular, if ν = 1,
 ∞                                             ∞
                                                          
∑ Wµ e µω = e ω 1 − k ∑ qλ e λω 
 0
           i          −i
                                      0
                                               0
                                                       i
                                                                       (3.937)

or

Wµ = − qλ +1k0                                                         (3.938)

Thus for a prediction one step ahead, the best value for fn+1(α) is
       ∞
− k0 ∑ qλ +1 f n − λ (α )                                              (3.939)
       0


===== PDF PAGE 173 =====

124                                                                  Chapter III



and by a process of step-­by-­step prediction, we can solve the
entire problem of linear prediction for discrete time series. As in
the continuous case, this will be the best prediction possible by
any method if
             ∞
f n (α ) = ∫ K ( n − τ ) dξ (τ , α )                                   (3.940)
             −∞


      The transfer of the filtering problem from the continuous to
the discrete case follows much the same lines of argument. For-
mula 3.913 for the frequency characteristic of the best filter takes
the form

   1       ∞                     π [Φ11 (u ) + Φ 21 (u )] e iuν du
          ∑
2π k (ω ) ν = a
                e − iω (ν − a) ∫
                                 − π          k (u )
                                                                       (3.941)


where all the terms receive the same definitions as in the con-
tinuous case, except that all integrals on ω or u are from −π to
π instead of from −∞ to ∞ and all sums on v are discrete sums
instead of integrals on t. The filters for discrete time series are
usually not so much physically constructible devices to be used
with an electric circuit as mathematical procedures to enable
statisticians to obtain the best results with statistically impure
data.
      Finally, the rate of transfer of information by a discrete time
series of the form
 ∞
∫ M (n − τ ) dξ (t , γ )
 −∞
                                                                       (3.942)

in the presence of a noise
 ∞
∫ N (n − τ ) dξ (t , δ )
 −∞
                                                                       (3.943)

when γ and δ are independent, will be the precise analogue of
Expression 3.922, namely,


===== PDF PAGE 174 =====

Time Series, Information, and Communication                        125



                       ∞           2     ∞                  2

 1 π             ∫    M (τ ) e iuτ dτ + ∫ N (τ ) e iuτ dτ
2π ∫− π
                   −∞                    −∞
        du log 2                            2
                                                                (3.944)
                                ∞
                             ∫ N ( τ ) e dτ
                              −∞
                                        iuτ




where over (−π, π),

 ∞                 2

∫ M ( τ ) e τ dτ
 −∞
            iu
                                                                (3.945)

represents the power distribution of the message in frequency,
and

 ∞                 2

∫ N ( τ ) e τ dτ
 −∞
           iu
                                                                (3.946)

that of the noise.
     The statistical theories we have here developed involve a full
knowledge of the pasts of the time series we observe. In every
case, we have to be content with less, as our observation does
not run indefinitely into the past. The development of our the-
ory beyond this point, as a practical statistical theory, involves
an extension of existing methods of sampling. The author and
others have made a beginning in this direction. It involves all
the complexities of the use either of Bayes’ law, on the one hand,
or of those terminological tricks in the theory of likelihood,6 on
the other, which seem to avoid the necessity for the use of Bayes’
law but which in reality transfer the responsibility for its use to
the working statistician, or the person who ultimately employs
his results. Meanwhile, the statistical theorist is quite honestly
able to say that he has said nothing which is not perfectly rigor-
ous and unimpeachable.
     Finally, this chapter should end with a discussion of mod-
ern quantum mechanics. These represent the highest point of
the invasion of modern physics by the theory of time series. In


===== PDF PAGE 175 =====

126                                                      Chapter III



the Newtonian physics, the sequence of physical phenomena is
completely determined by its past and in particular by the deter-
mination of all positions and momenta at any one moment. In
the complete Gibbsian theory, it is still true that with a perfect
determination of the multiple time series of the whole uni-
verse the knowledge of all positions and momenta at any one
moment would determine the entire future. It is only because
these are ignored, non-­observed coordinates and momenta that
the time series with which we actually work take on the sort of
mixing property with which we have become familiar in this
chapter, in the case of time series derived from the Brownian
motion. The great contribution of Heisenberg to physics was the
replacement of this still quasi-­Newtonian world of Gibbs by one
in which the time series can in no way be reduced to an assem-
bly of determinate threads of development in time. In quantum
mechanics, the whole past of an individual system does not
determine the future of that system in any absolute way but
merely the distribution of possible futures of the system. The
quantities which the classical physics demands for a knowledge
of the entire course of a system are not simultaneously observ-
able, except in a loose and approximate way, which nevertheless
is sufficiently precise for the needs of the classical physics over
the range of precision where it has been shown experimentally to be
applicable. The conditions of the observation of a momentum
and its corresponding position are incompatible. To observe the
position of a system as precisely as possible, we must observe it
with light or electron waves or similar means of high resolving
power, or short wavelength. However, the light has a particle
action depending on its frequency only, and to illuminate a body
with high-­frequency light means to subject it to a change in its
momentum which increases with the frequency. On the other


===== PDF PAGE 176 =====

Time Series, Information, and Communication                    127



hand, it is low-­frequency light that gives the minimum change
in the momenta of the particles it illuminates, and this has not
a sufficient resolving power to give a sharp indication of posi-
tions. Intermediate frequencies of light give a blurred account
both of positions and of momenta. In general, there is no set of
observations conceivable which can give us enough information
about the past of a system to give us complete information as to
its future.
   Nevertheless, as in the case of all ensembles of time series,
the theory of the amount of information which we have here
developed is applicable, and consequently the theory of entropy.
Since, however, we now are dealing with time series with the
mixing property, even when our data are as complete as they
can be, we find that our system has no absolute potential bar-
riers, and that in the course of time any state of the system can
and will transform itself into any other state. However, the prob-
ability of this depends in the long run on the relative probability
or measure of the two states. This turns out to be especially high
for states which can be transformed into themselves by a large
number of transformations, for states which, in the language of
the quantum theorist, have a high internal resonance, or a high
quantum degeneracy. The benzene ring is an example of this,
since the two states are equivalent. This suggests that in a sys-
tem in which various building blocks may combine themselves
intimately in various ways, as when a mixture of amino acids
organizes itself into protein chains, a situation where many of
these chains are alike and go through a stage of close association
with one another may be more stable than one in which they
are different. It was suggested by Haldane, in a tentative manner,
that this may be the way in which genes and viruses reproduce
themselves; and although he has not asserted this suggestion of


===== PDF PAGE 177 =====

128                                                      Chapter III



his with anything like finality, I see no cause not to retain it as
a tentative hypothesis. As Haldane himself has pointed out, as
no single particle in quantum theory has a perfectly sharp indi-
viduality, it is not possible in such a case to say, with more than
fragmentary accuracy, which of the two examples of a gene that
has reproduced itself in this manner is the master pattern and
which is the copy.




   This same phenomenon of resonance is known to be very
frequently represented in living matter. Szent-­Györgyi has sug-
gested its importance in the construction of muscles. Substances
with high resonance very generally have an abnormal capacity
for storing both energy and information, and such a storage cer-
tainly occurs in muscle contraction.
   Again, the same phenomena that are concerned in repro-
duction probably have something to do with the extraordinary
specificity of the chemical substances found in a living organ-
ism, not only from species to species but even within the indi-
viduals of a species. Such considerations may be very important
in immunology.


===== PDF PAGE 178 =====

IV Feedback and Oscillation




A patient comes into a neurological clinic. He is not paralyzed,
and he can move his legs when he receives the order. Neverthe-
less, he suffers under a severe disability. He walks with a peculiar
uncertain gait, with eyes downcast on the ground and on his
legs. He starts each step with a kick, throwing each leg in suc-
cession in front of him. If blindfolded, he cannot stand up, and
totters to the ground. What is the matter with him?
   Another patient comes in. While he sits at rest in his chair,
there seems to be nothing wrong with him. However, offer him
a cigarette, and he will swing his hand past it in trying to pick
it up. This will be followed by an equally futile swing in the
other direction, and this by still a third swing back, until his
motion becomes nothing but a futile and violent oscillation.
Give him a glass of water, and he will empty it in these swings
before he is able to bring it to his mouth. What is the matter
with him?
   Both of these patients are suffering from one form or another
of what is known as ataxia. Their muscles are strong and healthy
enough, but they are unable to organize their actions. The first
patient suffers from tabes dorsalis. The part of the spinal cord
which ordinarily receives sensations has been damaged or


===== PDF PAGE 179 =====

130                                                    Chapter IV



destroyed by the late sequelae of syphilis. The incoming mes-
sages are blunted, if they have not totally disappeared. The
receptors in the joints and tendons and muscles and the soles
of his feet, which ordinarily convey to him the position and
state of motion of his legs, send no messages which his central
nervous system can pick up and transmit, and for information
concerning his posture he is obliged to trust to his eyes and the
balancing organs of his inner ear. In the jargon of the physiolo-
gist, he has lost an important part of his proprioceptive or kin-
esthetic sense.
   The second patient has lost none of his proprioceptive sense.
His injury is elsewhere, in the cerebellum, and he is suffering
from what is known as a cerebellar tremor or purpose tremor. It
seems likely that the cerebellum has some function of propor-
tioning the muscular response to the proprioceptive input, and
if this proportioning is disturbed, a tremor may be one of the
results.
   We thus see that for effective action on the outer world it is
not only essential that we possess good effectors, but that the
performance of these effectors be properly monitored back to
the central nervous system, and that the readings of these moni-
tors be properly combined with the other information coming
in from the sense organs to produce a properly proportioned
output to the effectors. Something quite similar is the case in
mechanical systems. Let us consider a signal tower on a railroad.
The signalman controls a number of levers which turn the sema-
phore signals on or off and which regulate the setting of the
switches. However, it does not do for him to assume blindly that
the signals and the switches have followed his orders. It may
be that the switches have frozen fast, or that the weight of a
load of snow has bent the signal arms, and that what he has


===== PDF PAGE 180 =====

Feedback and Oscillation                                          131



supposed to be the actual state of the switches and the signals—­
his effectors—­does not correspond to the orders he has given.
To avoid the dangers inherent in this contingency, every effec-
tor, switch or signal, is attached to a telltale back in the signal
tower, which conveys to the signalman its actual states and per-
formance. This is the mechanical equivalent of the repeating of
orders in the navy, according to a code by which every subordi-
nate, upon the reception of an order, must repeat it back to his
superior, to show that he has heard and understood it. It is on
such repeated orders that the signalman must act.
   Notice that in this system there is a human link in the chain
of the transmission and return of information: in what we shall
from now on call the chain of feedback. It is true that the signal-
man is not altogether a free agent; that his switches and signals
are interlocked, either mechanically or electrically, and that he
is not free to choose some of the more disastrous combinations.
There are, however, feedback chains in which no human element
intervenes. The ordinary thermostat by which we regulate the
heating of a house is one of these. There is a setting for the desired
room temperature; and if the actual temperature of the house is
below this, an apparatus is actuated which opens the damper, or
increases the flow of fuel oil, and brings the temperature of the
house up to the desired level. If, on the other hand, the tempera-
ture of the house exceeds the desired level, the dampers are turned
off or the flow of fuel oil is slackened or interrupted. In this way
the temperature of the house is kept approximately at a steady
level. Note that the constancy of this level depends on the good
design of the thermostat, and that a badly designed thermostat
may send the temperature of the house into violent oscillations
not unlike the motions of the man suffering from cerebellar
tremor.


===== PDF PAGE 181 =====

132                                                    Chapter IV



  Another example of a purely mechanical feedback system—­
the one originally treated by Clerk Maxwell—­is that of the gov-
ernor of a steam engine, which serves to regulate its velocity
under varying conditions of load. In the original form designed
by Watt, it consists of two balls attached to pendulum rods
and swinging on opposite sides of a rotating shaft. They are
kept down by their own weight or by a spring, and they are
swung upward by a centrifugal action dependent on the angu-
lar velocity of the shaft. They thus assume a compromise posi-
tion likewise dependent on the angular velocity. This position
is transmitted by other rods to a collar about the shaft, which
actuates a member which serves to open the intake valves of the
cylinder when the engine slows down and the balls fall, and to
close them when the engine speeds up and the balls rise. Notice
that the feedback tends to oppose what the system is already
doing, and is thus negative.
  We have thus examples of negative feedbacks to stabilize tem-
perature and negative feedbacks to stabilize velocity. There are
also negative feedbacks to stabilize position, as in the case of
the steering engines of a ship, which are actuated by the angular
difference between the position of the wheel and the position
of the rudder, and always act so as to bring the position of the
rudder into accord with that of the wheel. The feedback of vol-
untary activity is of this nature. We do not will the motions of
certain muscles, and indeed we generally do not know which
muscles are to be moved to accomplish a given task; we will, say,
to pick up a cigarette. Our motion is regulated by some measure
of the amount by which it has not yet been accomplished.
  The information fed back to the control center tends to
oppose the departure of the controlled from the controlling
quantity, but it may depend in widely different ways on this


===== PDF PAGE 182 =====

Feedback and Oscillation                                             133



departure. The simplest control systems are linear: the output
of the effector is a linear expression in the input, and when we
add inputs, we also add outputs. The output is read by some
apparatus equally linear. This reading is simply subtracted from
the input. We wish to give a precise theory of the performance
of such a piece of apparatus, and, in particular, of its defective
behavior and its breaking into oscillation when it is mishandled
or overloaded.
   In this book, we have avoided mathematical symbolism
and mathematical technique as far as possible, although we
have been forced to compromise with them in various places,
and in particular in the previous chapter. Here, too, in the rest
of the present chapter, we are dealing precisely with those mat-
ters for which the symbolism of mathematics is the appropriate
language, and we can avoid it only by long periphrases which
are scarcely intelligible to the layman, and which are intelligible
only to the reader acquainted with mathematical symbolism by
virtue of his ability to translate them into this symbolism. The
best compromise we can make is to supplement the symbolism
by an ample verbal explanation.
   Let f(t) be a function of the time t where t runs from −∞ to ∞;
that is, let f(t) be a quantity assuming a numerical value for each
time t. At any time t, the quantities f(s) are accessible to us when
s is less than or equal to t but not when s is greater than t. There
are pieces of apparatus, electrical and mechanical, which delay
their input by a fixed time, and these yield us, for an input f(t),
an output f(t − τ), where τ is the fixed delay.
   We may combine several pieces of apparatus of this kind,
yielding us outputs f(t − τ1), f(t − τ2), ..., f(t − τn). We can multiply
each of these outputs by fixed quantities, positive or negative.
For example, we may use a potentiometer to multiply a voltage


===== PDF PAGE 183 =====

134                                                         Chapter IV



by a fixed positive number less than 1, and it is not too difficult
to devise automatic balancing devices and amplifiers to multiply
a voltage by quantities which are negative or are greater than 1.
It is also not difficult to construct simple wiring diagrams of cir-
cuits by which we can add voltages continuously, and with the
aid of these we may obtain an output
n

∑ a f (t − τ )
1
       k      k                                                 (4.01)

By increasing the number of delays τk and suitably adjusting the
coefficients ak, we may approximate as closely as we wish to an
output of the form
 ∞
∫ a (τ ) f (t − τ ) dτ
 0
                                                                (4.02)

      In this expression, it is important to realize that the fact that
we are integrating from 0 to ∞, and not from −∞ to ∞, is essen-
tial. Otherwise we could use various practical devices to operate
on this result and to obtain f(t + σ), where σ is positive. This,
however, involves the knowledge of the future of f(t); and f(t)
may be a quantity, like the coordinates of a streetcar which may
turn off one way or the other at a switch, which is not deter-
mined by its past. When a physical process seems to yield us an
operator which converts f(t) to
 ∞
∫ a (τ ) f (t − τ ) dτ
 −∞
                                                                (4.03)

where a(τ) does not effectively vanish for negative values of τ,
it means that we have no longer a true operator on f(t), deter-
mined uniquely by its past. There are physical cases where this
may occur. For example, a dynamical system with no input may
go into permanent oscillation, or even oscillation building up
to infinity, with an undetermined amplitude. In such a case,


===== PDF PAGE 184 =====

Feedback and Oscillation                                             135



the future of the system is not determined by the past, and we
may in appearance find a formalism which suggests an operator
dependent on the future.
     The operation by which we obtain Expression 4.02 from f(t)
has two important further properties: (I) it is independent of a
shift of the origin of time, and (2) it is linear. The first property
is expressed by the statement that if
              ∞
g (t ) = ∫ α (τ ) f (t − τ ) dτ                                   (4.04)
           0


then
                  ∞
g (t + σ ) = ∫ α (τ ) f (t + σ − τ ) dτ                           (4.05)
                  0


The second property is expressed by the statement that if

g (t ) = Af1 (t ) + Bf 2 (t )                                     (4.06)

then
 ∞
∫ a (τ ) g (t − τ ) dτ
 0
                                                                  (4.07)
           ∞                               ∞
     = A∫ a (τ ) f1 (t − τ ) dτ + B ∫ a (τ ) f 2 (t − τ ) dτ
          0                                0


     It may be shown that in an appropriate sense every operator
on the past of f(t) which is linear and is invariant under a shift of the
origin of time is either of the form of Expression 4.02 or is a limit of
a sequence of operators of that form. For example, f ′(t) is the result
of an operator with these properties when applied to f(t), and

                      ∞   1 τ
f ′ (t ) = lim ∫            a   f (t − τ ) dτ                   (4.08)
           →0    0       2   

where

          1   0 x <1
          
a ( x ) =  −1 1  x  2                                          (4.09)
          0 2  x
          


===== PDF PAGE 185 =====

136                                                        Chapter IV



      As we have seen before, the functions ezt are a set offunctions
f(t) which are particularly important from the point of view of
Operator 4.02, since

e z (t −τ ) = e zt ⋅ e − zτ                                   (4.10)

and the delay operator becomes merely a multiplier dependent
on z. Thus Operator 4.02 becomes
       ∞
e zt ∫ a (τ ) e − zτ dτ                                       (4.11)
      0


and is also a multiplication operator dependent on z only. The
expression
  ∞
∫ a ( τ ) e τ dτ = A ( z )
 0
               −z
                                                              (4.12)

is said to be the representation of Operator 4.02 as a function of
frequency. If z is taken as the complex quantity x + iy, where x
and y are real, this becomes
  ∞
∫ a ( τ ) e τ e τ dτ
 0
               −x    − iu
                                                              (4.13)

so that by the well-­known Schwarz inequality concerning inte-
grals, if y > 0 and
  ∞
∫ a ( τ ) dτ < ∞
              2
                                                              (4.14)
 0


we have
                                             1
                   ∞           ∞
A ( x + iy )   ∫ a (τ ) dτ ∫ e −2 xτ dτ 
                          2                   2

                 0            0            
                                       1                      (4.15)
                         1 ∞
                    =  ∫ a (τ ) dτ 
                                        2
                                 2

                        2x 0         

      This means that A(x + iy) is a bounded holomorphic func-
tion of a complex variable in every half-­plane x   > 0, and that


===== PDF PAGE 186 =====

Feedback and Oscillation                                           137



the function A(iy) represents in a certain very definite sense the
boundary values of such a function.
   Let us put

u + iv = A ( x + iy )                                           (4.16)

where u and v are real. The x + iy will be determined as a function
(not necessarily single-­valued) of u + iv. This function will be
analytic, though meromorphic, except at the points u + iv cor-
responding to points z = x + iy, where ∂A(z)/∂z = 0. The boundary
x = 0 will go into the curve with the parametric equation

u + iv = A (iy )   ( y real )                                   (4.17)

   This new curve may intersect itself any number of times.
In general, however, it will divide the plane into two regions.
Let us consider the curve (Eq. 4.17) traced in the direction in
which y goes from −∞ to ∞. Then if we depart from Eq. 4.17
to the right and follow a continuous course not again cutting
Eq. 4.17, we may arrive at certain points. The points which are
neither in this set nor on Eq. 4.17 we shall call exterior points.
The part of the curve (Eq. 4.17) which contains limit points of
the exterior points we shall call the effective boundary. All other
points will be termed interior points. Thus in the diagram of
Fig. 1, with the boundary drawn in the sense of the arrow, the
interior points are shaded and the effective boundary is drawn
heavily.
   The condition that A be bounded in any right half-­plane will
then tell us that the point at infinity cannot be an interior point. It
may be a boundary point, although there are certain very defi-
nite restrictions on the character of the type of boundary point
it may be. These concern the “thickness” of the set of interior
points reaching out to infinity.


===== PDF PAGE 187 =====

138                                                     Chapter IV




Fig. 1


   Now we come to the problem of the mathematical expression
of the problem of linear feedback. Let the control flow chart—­
not the wiring diagram—­of such a system be as shown in Fig. 2.
Here the input of the motor is Y, which is the difference between
the original input X and the output of the multiplier, which
multiplies the power output AY of the motor by the factor λ.
Thus

Y = X − λ AY                                                (4.18)

and

         X
Y=                                                          (4.19)
      1 + λA

so that the motor output is

              A
AY = X                                                      (4.20)
           1 + λA
   The operator produced by the whole feedback mechanism is
then A/(1 + λA). This will be infinite when and only when A = −1/λ.
The diagram (Eq. 4.17) for this new operator will be

              A (iy )
u + iv =                                                    (4.21)
           1 + λ A (iy )


===== PDF PAGE 188 =====

Feedback and Oscillation                                         139




Fig. 2


and ∞ will be an interior point of this when and only when −1/λ is an
interior point of Eq. 4.17.
   In this case, a feedback with a multiplier λ will certainly pro-
duce something catastrophic, and, as a matter of fact the catas-
trophe will be that the system will go into unrestrained and
increasing oscillation. If, on the other hand, the point −1/λ is an
exterior point, it may be shown that there will be no difficulty,
and the feedback is stable. If −1/λ is on the effective boundary,
a more elaborate discussion is necessary. Under most circum-
stances, the system may go into an oscillation of an amplitude
which does not increase.
   It is perhaps worth considering several operators A and the
ranges of feedback which are admissible under them. We shall
consider not only the operations of Expression 4.02 but also their
limits, assuming that the same argument will apply to these.
   If the operator A corresponds to the differential operator, A(z)
= z, as y goes from −∞ to ∞, A(y) does the same, and the interior


===== PDF PAGE 189 =====

140                                                      Chapter IV



points are the points interior to the right, half-­plane. The point
−1/λ is always an exterior point, and any amount of feedback is
possible. If

            1
A (z) =                                                       (4.22)
          1 + kz

the curve (Eq. 4.17) is

              1
u + iv =                                                      (4.23)
           1 + kiy

or

          1                    − ky
u=                   v=                                       (4.24)
      1 + k2 y 2             1 + k2 y 2

which we may write

u2 + v 2 = u                                                  (4.25)

This is a circle with radius 1/2, and center at (1/2, 0). It is
described in the clockwise sense, and the interior points are
those which we should ordinarily consider interior. In this case
too, the admissible feedback is unlimited, as −1/λ is always out-
side the circle. The a(t) corresponding to this operator is

a (t ) = e −t k k                                             (4.26)

Again, let

               1 2
A ( z ) =                                                   (4.27)
            1 + kz 

Then Eq. 4.17 is
                         2
          1            (1 − kiy )       2
u + iv =             =                                       (4.28)
          1 + kiy    (1 + k2 y 2 )2


===== PDF PAGE 190 =====

Feedback and Oscillation                                                141



and

      1 − k2 y 2                        −2ky
u=                     ,        v=                                    (4.29)
     (1 + k y )
             2   2 2
                                     (1 + k2 y 2 )2
This yields

                       1
u2 + v 2 =                                                            (4.30)
             (1 + k2 y 2 )      2



or

           −v
y=                                                                    (4.31)
     (u 2 + v 2 ) 2 k
Then

                        k2 v 2                           v2
u = (u2 + v 2 ) 1 −                 = (u 2 + v 2 ) −                (4.32)
                   4k (u + v ) 
                       2  2     2 2                    4 (u + v 2 )
                                                           2



In polar coordinates, if u = ρ cos ϕ, v = ρ sin ϕ, this becomes

                   sin2 φ       1 cos2 φ
ρ cos φ = ρ 2 −           = ρ2 − +                                    (4.33)
                     4          4   4
or

     cos φ    1
ρ−         =±                                                         (4.34)
      2       2

That is,

 1         φ                1            φ
ρ 2 = − sin ,              ρ 2 = cos                                  (4.35)
           2                             2

It can be shown that these two equations represent only one
curve, a cardioid with vertex at the origin and cusp pointing to
the right. The interior of this curve will contain no point of the
negative real axis, and, as in the previous case, the admissible
amplification is unlimited. Here the operator a(t) is


===== PDF PAGE 191 =====

142                                                       Chapter IV



           t −tk
a (t ) =      e                                               (4.36)
           k2

Let

               1 3
A ( z ) =                                                   (4.37)
            1 + kz 

Let p and ϕ be defined as in the last case. Then

  1        φ     1     φ    1
ρ 3 cos      + iρ 3 sin =                                     (4.38)
           3           3 1 + kiy

As in the first case, this will give us

 2          φ    2      φ   2      φ
ρ 3 cos2      + ρ 3 sin2 = ρ 3 cos                            (4.39)
            3           3          3

That is,

  1          φ
ρ 3 = cos                                                     (4.40)
             3

which is a curve of the shape of Fig. 3. The shaded region repre-
sents the interior points. All feedback with coefficient exceeding
1/8 is impossible. The corresponding a(t) is

          t 2 −t k
a (t ) =      e                                               (4.41)
         2k 3
      Finally, let our operator corresponding to A be a simple delay
of T units of time. Then

A ( z ) = e −Tz                                               (4.42)

Then

u + iv = e −Tiy = cos Ty − i sin Ty                           (4.43)

      The curve (Eq. 4.17) will be the unit circle about the origin,
described in a clockwise sense about the origin with unit velocity.


===== PDF PAGE 192 =====

Feedback and Oscillation                                      143




Fig. 3


The inside of this curve will be the inside in the ordinary sense,
and the limit of feedback intensity will be 1.
   There is one very interesting conclusion to be drawn from
this. It is possible to compensate for the operator 1/(1 + kz) by
an arbitrarily heavy feedback, which will give us an A/(1 + λA) as
near to 1 as we wish for as large a frequency range as we wish. It
is thus possible to compensate for three successive operators of
this sort by three—­or even two—­successive feedbacks. It is not,
however, possible to compensate as closely as we wish for an
operator 1/(1 + kz)3, which is the resultant of the composition of
three operators 1/(1 + kz) in cascade, by a single feedback, The
operator 1/(1 + kz)3 may also be written


===== PDF PAGE 193 =====

144                                                     Chapter IV




 1 d2       1
                                                            (4.44)
2k 2 dz 2 1 + kz

and may be regarded as the limit of the additive composition of
three operators with first-­degree denominators, It thus appears
that a sum of different operators, each of which may be compen-
sated as well as we wish by a single feedback, cannot itself be so
compensated.
   In the important book of MacColl, we have an example of a
complicated system which can be stabilized by two feedbacks
but not by one. It concerns the steering of a ship by a gyro-
compass. The angle between the course set by the quartermaster
and that shown by the compass expresses itself in the turning
of the rudder, which, in view of the headway of the ship, pro-
duces a turning moment which serves to change the course of
the ship in such a way as to decrease the difference between the
set course and the actual course. If this is done by a direct open-
ing of the valves of one steering engine and closing of the valves
of the other in such a way that the turning velocity of the rud-
der is proportional to the deviation of the ship from this course,
let us note that the angular position of the rudder is roughly
proportional to the turning moment of the ship and thus to its
angular acceleration. Hence the amount of turning of the ship is
proportional with a negative factor to the third derivative of the
deviation from the course, and the operation which we have to
stabilize by the feedback from the gyrocompass is kz3, where k is
positive. We thus get for our curve (Eq. 4.17)

u + iv = − kiy 3                                            (4.45)

and, as the left half-­plane is the interior region, no servomecha-
nism whatever will stabilize the system.


===== PDF PAGE 194 =====

Feedback and Oscillation                                        145



   In this account, we have slightly oversimplified the steer-
ing problem. Actually there is a certain amount of friction, and
the force turning the ship does not determine the acceleration.
Instead, if θ is the angular position of the ship and ϕ that of the
rudder with respect to the ship, we have

d 2θ            dθ
     = c1φ − c2                                              (4.46)
dt 2            dt

and

u + iv = − k1iy 3 − k2 y 2                                   (4.47)

This curve may be written

v 2 = − k3u3                                                 (4.48)

which still cannot be stabilized by any feedback. As y goes from
−∞ to ∞, u goes from ∞ to −∞, and the inside of the curve is to
the left.
   If, on the other hand, the position of the rudder is propor-
tional to the deviation of the course, the operator to be stabilized
by feedback is k1z2 + k2z, and Eq. 4.17 becomes

u + iv = − k1 y 2 + k2iy                                     (4.49)

This curve may be written

v 2 = − k3u                                                  (4.50)

but in this case, as y goes from −∞ to ∞, so does v, and the curve
is described from y = −∞ to y = ∞. In this case, the outside of the
curve is to the left, and unlimited amount of amplification is
possible.
   To achieve this we may employ another stage of feedback. If
we regulate the position of the valves of the steering engine, not
by the discrepancy between the actual and the desired course but


===== PDF PAGE 195 =====

146                                                     Chapter IV



by the difference between this quantity and the angular position
of the rudder, we shall keep the angular position of the rudder
as nearly proportional to the ship’s deviation from true course as
we wish, if we allow a large enough feedback—­that is, if we open
the valves wide enough. This double feedback system of control
is in fact the one usually adopted for the automatic steering of
ships by means of the gyrocompass.
  In the human body, the motion of a hand or a finger involves
a system with a large number of joints. The output is an additive
vectorial combination of the outputs of all these joints. We have
seen that, in general, a complex additive system like this cannot
be stabilized by a single feedback. Correspondingly, the volun-
tary feedback by which we regulate the performance of a task
through the observation of the amount by which it is not yet
accomplished needs the backing up of other feedbacks. These we
call postural feedbacks, and they are associated with the general
maintenance of tone of the muscular system. It is the volun-
tary feedback which shows a tendency to break down or become
deranged in cases of cerebellar injury, for the ensuing tremor
does not appear unless the patient tries to perform a voluntary
task. This purpose tremor, in which the patient cannot pick up
a glass of water without upsetting it, is very different in nature
from the tremor of Parkinsonism, or paralysis agitans, which
appears in its most typical form when the patient is at rest, and
indeed often seems to be greatly mitigated when he attempts to
perform a specific task. There are surgeons with Parkinsonism
who manage to operate quite efficiently. Parkinsonism is known
not to have its origin in a diseased condition of the cerebellum,
but to be associated with a pathological focus somewhere in the
brain stem. It is only one of the diseases of the postural feed-
backs, and many of these must have their origin in defects of


===== PDF PAGE 196 =====

Feedback and Oscillation                                       147



parts of the nervous system situated very differently. One of the
great tasks of physiological cybernetics is to disentangle and iso-
late loci of the different parts of this complex of voluntary and
postural feedbacks. Examples of component reflexes of this sort
are the scratch and the walking reflex.
   When feedback is possible and stable, its advantage, as we
have already said, is to make performance less dependent on the
load. Let us consider that the load changes the characteristic A
by dA. The fractional change will be dA/A. If the operator after
feedback is

      A
B=                                                          (4.51)
     C+A

we shall have

              C
       −d 1 + 
                     C
                       dA
dB
   =           A  = A2    =
                             dA C
                                                            (4.52)
 B           C          C     A A+C
         1+          1+
             A          A

Thus feedback serves to diminish the dependence of the system
on the characteristic of the motor, and serves to stabilize it, for
all frequencies for which

A+C
    >1                                                      (4.53)
 C

This is to say that the entire boundary between interior and
exterior points must lie inside the circle of radius C about the
point −C. This will not even be true in the first of the cases we
have discussed. The effect of a heavy negative feedback, if it is
at all stable, will be to increase the stability of the system for
low frequencies, but generally at the expense of its stability for
some high frequencies. There are many cases in which even this
degree of stabilization is advantageous.


===== PDF PAGE 197 =====

148                                                      Chapter IV



   A very important question which arises in connection with
oscillations due to an excessive amount of feedback is that of
the frequency of incipient oscillation. This is determined by the
value of y in the iy corresponding to the point of the boundary
of the inside and outside regions of Eq. 4.17 lying furthest from
the left on the negative u-­axis. The quantity y is of course of the
nature of a frequency.
   We have now come to the end of an elementary discussion of
linear oscillations, studied from the point of view of feedback.
A linear oscillating system has certain very special properties
which characterize its oscillations. One is that when it oscillates,
it always can and very generally—­in the absence of independent
simultaneous oscillations—­does oscillate in the form

A sin ( Bt + C ) e Dt                                        (4.54)

The existence of a periodic non-­sinusoidal oscillation is always
a suggestion at least that the variable observed is one in which
the system is not linear. In some cases, but in very few, the sys-
tem may be rendered linear again by a new choice of the inde-
pendent variable. Another very significant difference between
linear and non-­linear oscillations is that in the first the ampli-
tude of oscillation is completely independent of the frequency;
while in the latter, there is generally only one amplitude, or at
most a discrete set of amplitudes, for which the system will oscil-
late at a given frequency, as well as a discrete set of frequen-
cies for which the system will oscillate. This is well illustrated
by the study of what happens in an organ pipe. There are two
theories of the organ pipe—­a cruder linear theory, and a more
precise non-­linear theory. In the first, the organ pipe is treated
as a conservative system. No question is asked about how the
pipe came to oscillate, and the level of oscillation is completely


===== PDF PAGE 198 =====

Feedback and Oscillation                                         149



indeterminate. In the second theory, the oscillation of the organ
pipe is considered as dissipating energy, and this energy is con-
sidered to have its origin in the stream of air across the lip of
the pipe. There is indeed a theoretical steady-­state flow of air
across the lip of the pipe which does not interchange any energy
with any of the modes of oscillation of the pipe, but for certain
velocities of air flow this steady-­state condition is unstable. The
slightest chance deviation from it will introduce an energy input
into one or more of the natural modes of linear oscillation of
the pipe; and up to a certain point, this motion will actually
increase the coupling of the proper modes of oscillation of the
pipe with the energy input. The rate of energy input and the
rate of energy output by thermal dissipation and otherwise have
different laws of growth, but, to arrive at a steady state of oscil-
lation, these two quantities must be identical. Thus the level of
the non-­linear oscillation is determined just as definitely as its
frequency.
   The case we have examined is an example of what is known
as a relaxation oscillation: a case, that is, where a system of equa-
tions invariant under a translation in time leads to a solution
periodic—­or corresponding to some generalized notion of peri-
odicity—­in time, and determinate in amplitude and frequency
but not in phase. In the case we have discussed, the frequency
of oscillation of the system is close to that of some loosely cou-
pled, nearly linear part of the system. B. van der Pol, one of the
chief authorities on relaxation oscillations, has pointed out that
this is not always the case, and that there are in fact relaxation
oscillations where the predominating frequency is not near
the frequency of linear oscillation of any part of the system.
An example is given by a stream of gas flowing into a chamber
open to the air and in which a pilot light is burning: when the


===== PDF PAGE 199 =====

150                                                       Chapter IV



concentration of gas in the air reaches a certain critical value, the
system is ready to explode under ignition by the pilot light, and
the time it takes for this to happen depends only on the rate of
flow of the coal gas, the rate at which air seeps in and the prod-
ucts of combustion seep out, and the percentage composition of
an explosive mixture of coal gas and air.
   In general, non-­linear systems of equations are hard to solve.
There is, however, a specially tractable case, in which the system
differs only slightly from a linear system, and the terms which
distinguish it change so slowly that they may be considered sub-
stantially constant over a period of oscillation. In this case, we
may study the non-­linear system as if it were a linear system
with slowly varying parameters. Systems which may be studied
this way are said to be perturbed secularly, and the theory of
secularly perturbed systems plays a most important role in gravi-
tational astronomy.
   It is quite possible that some of the physiological tremors
may be treated somewhat roughly as secularly perturbed lin-
ear systems. We can see quite clearly in such a system why the
steady-­state amplitude level may be just as determinate as the
frequency. Let one element in such a system be an amplifier
whose gain decreases as some long-­time average of the input of
such a system increases. Then as the oscillation of the system
builds up, the gain may be reduced until a state of equilibrium
is reached.
   Non-­linear systems of relaxation oscillations have been stud-
ied in some cases by methods developed by Hill and Poincaré.1
The classical cases for the study of such oscillations are those
in which the equations of the systems are of a different nature;
especially where these differential equations are of low order.
There is not, as far as I know, any comparable adequate study of


===== PDF PAGE 200 =====

Feedback and Oscillation                                         151



the corresponding integral equations when the system depends
for its future behavior on its entire past behavior. However, it is
not hard to sketch out the form such a theory should take, espe-
cially when we are looking only for periodic solutions. In this
case, the slight modification of the constants of the equation
should lead to a slight, and therefore nearly linear, modification
of the equations of motion. For example, let Op[f(t)] be a func-
tion of t which results from a non-­linear operation on f(t), and
which is affected by a translation. Then the variation of Op[f(t)],
δOp[f(t)] corresponding to a variational change δf(t) in f(t) and a
known change in the dynamics of the system, is linear but not
homogeneous in δf(t), though not linear in f(t). If we now know
a solution f(t) of

Op [ f (t )] = 0                                              (4.55)

and we change the dynamics of the system, we obtain a linear
non-­homogeneous equation for δf(t). If
          ∞
f (t ) = ∑ an e inλt                                          (4.56)
          −∞


and f(t) + δf(t) is also periodic, being of the form
                       ∞
f (t ) + δ f (t ) = ∑ ( an + δ an ) e in(λ +δλ )t             (4.57)
                     −∞


then
              ∞               ∞
δ f (t ) = ∑ δ an e iλnt + ∑ an e iλnt inδλt                  (4.58)
           −∞                −∞


The linear equations for δf(t) will have all coefficients develop-
able into series in etλnt, since f(t) can itself be developed in this
form. We shall thus obtain an infinite system of linear non-­
homogeneous equations in δan + an, δλ, and λ, and this system


===== PDF PAGE 201 =====

152                                                       Chapter IV



of equations may be solvable by the methods of Hill. In this
case, it is at least conceivable that by starting with a linear equa-
tion (non-­homogeneous) and gradually shifting the constraints
we may arrive at a solution of a very general type of non-­linear
problem in relaxation oscillations. This work, however, lies in
the future.
   To a certain extent, the feedback systems of control discussed
in this chapter and the compensation systems discussed in the
previous one are competitors. They both serve to bring the
complicated input-­output relations of an effector into a form
approaching a simple proportionality. The feedback system, as
we have seen, does more than this, and has a performance rela-
tively independent of the characteristic and changes of charac-
teristic of the effector used. The relative usefulness of the two
methods of control thus depends on the constancy of the char-
acteristic of the effector. It is natural to suppose that cases arise
in which it is advantageous to combine the two methods. There
are various ways of doing this. One of the most simple is that
illustrated in the diagram of Fig. 4.




Fig. 4


===== PDF PAGE 202 =====

Feedback and Oscillation                                         153




Fig. 5


   In this, the entire feedback system may be regarded as a larger
effector, and no new point arises, except that the compensa-
tor must be arranged to compensate what is in some sense the
average characteristic of the feedback system. Another type of
arrangement is shown in Fig. 5.
   Here the compensator and effector are combined into one
larger effector. This change will in general alter the maximum
feedback admissible, and it is not easy to see how it can ordinar-
ily be made to increase that level to an important extent. On the
other hand, for the same feedback level, it will most definitely
improve the performance of the system. If, for example, the
effector has an essentially lagging characteristic, the compensa-
tor will be an anticipator or predictor, designed for its statistical
ensemble of inputs. Our feedback, which we may call an antici-
patory feedback, will tend to hurry up the action of the effector
mechanism.
   Feedbacks of this general type are certainly found in human
and animal reflexes. When we go duck shooting, the error which
we try to minimize is not that between the position of the gun
and the actual position of the target but that between the posi-
tion of the gun and the anticipated position of the target. Any
system of anti-­aircraft fire control must meet the same problem.
The conditions of stability and effectiveness of anticipatory


===== PDF PAGE 203 =====

154                                                      Chapter IV



feedbacks need a more thorough discussion than they have yet
received.
   Another interesting variant of feedback systems is found in
the way in which we steer a car on an icy road. Our entire con-
duct of driving depends on a knowledge of the slipperiness of
the road surface, that is, on a knowledge of the performance
characteristics of the system car–­road. If we wait to find this out
by the ordinary performance of the system, we shall discover
ourselves in a skid before we know it. We thus give to the steer-
ing wheel a succession of small, fast impulses, not enough to
throw the car into a major skid but quite enough to report to our
kinesthetic sense whether the car is in danger of skidding, and
we regulate our method of steering accordingly.
   This method of control, which we may call control by infor-
mative feedback, is not difficult to schematize into a mechanical
form and may well be worthwhile employing in practice. We
have a compensator for our effector, and this compensator has
a characteristic which may be varied from outside. We super-
impose on the incoming message a weak high-­frequency input
and take off the output of the effector a partial output of the
same high frequency, separated from the rest of the output by
an appropriate filter. We explore the amplitude-­phase relations
of the high-­frequency output to the input in order to obtain
the performance characteristics of the effector. On the basis of
this, we modify in the appropriate sense the characteristics of
the compensator. The flow chart of the system is much as in the
diagram of Fig. 6.
   The advantages of this type of feedback are that the compen-
sator may be adjusted to give stability for every type of constant
load; and that, if the characteristic of the load changes slowly
enough, in what we have called a secular manner, in comparison


===== PDF PAGE 204 =====

Feedback and Oscillation                                       155




Fig. 6


with the changes of the original input, and if the reading of the
load condition is accurate, the system has no tendency to go
into oscillation. There are very many cases where the change of
load is secular in this manner. For example, the frictional load of
a gun turret depends on the stiffness of the grease, and this again
on the temperature; but this stiffness will not change apprecia-
bly in a few swings of the turret.
   Of course, this informative feedback will work well only if the
characteristics of the load at high frequencies are the same as, or
give a good indication of, its characteristics at low frequencies.
   This will often be the case if the character of the load, and
hence of the effector, contains a relatively small number of vari-
able parameters.
   This informative feedback and the examples we have given of
feedback with compensators are only particular cases of what is
a very complicated theory, and a theory as yet imperfectly stud-
ied. The whole field is undergoing a very rapid development. It
deserves much more attention in the near future.


===== PDF PAGE 205 =====

156                                                     Chapter IV



  Before we end this chapter, we must not forget another
important physiological application of the principle of feed-
back. A great group of cases in which some sort of feedback is
not only exemplified in physiological phenomena but is abso-
lutely essential for the continuation of life is found in what is
known as homeostasis. The conditions under which life, espe-
cially healthy life, can continue in the higher animals are quite
narrow. A variation of one-­half degree centigrade in the body
temperature is generally a sign of illness, and a permanent varia-
tion of five degrees is scarcely consistent with life. The osmotic
pressure of the blood and its hydrogen-­ion concentration must
be held within strict limits. The waste products of the body must
be excreted before they rise to toxic concentrations. Beside all
these, our leucocytes and our chemical defenses against infec-
tion must be kept at adequate levels; our heart rate and blood
pressure must neither be too high nor too low; our sex cycle
must conform to the racial needs of reproduction; our calcium
metabolism must be such as neither to soften our bones nor to
calcify our tissues; and so on. In short, our inner economy must
contain an assembly of thermostats, automatic hydrogen-­ion-­
concentration controls, governors, and the like, which would
be adequate for a great chemical plant. These are what we know
collectively as our homeostatic mechanism.
  Our homeostatic feedbacks have one general difference from
our voluntary and our postural feedbacks: they tend to be slower.
There are very few changes in physiological homeostasis—­not
even cerebral anemia—­that produce serious or permanent dam-
age in a small fraction of a second. Accordingly, the nerve fibers
reserved for the processes of homeostasis—­the sympathetic and
parasympathetic systems—­
                        are often non-­
                                      myelinated and are
known to have a considerably slower rate of transmission than


===== PDF PAGE 206 =====

Feedback and Oscillation                                     157



the myelinated fibers. The typical effectors of homeostasis—­
smooth muscles and glands—­are likewise slow in their action
compared with striped muscles, the typical effectors of volun-
tary and postural activity. Many of the messages of the homeo-
static system are carried by non-­nervous channels—­the direct
anastomosis of the muscular fibers of the heart, or chemical mes-
sengers such as the hormones, the carbon dioxide content of the
blood, etc.; and, except in the case of the heart muscle, these
too are generally slower modes of transmission than myelinated
nerve fibers.
   Any complete textbook on cybernetics should contain a thor-
ough detailed discussion of homeostatic processes, many indi-
vidual cases of which have been discussed in the literature with
some detail.2 However, this book is rather an introduction to the
subject than a compendious treatise, and the theory of homeo-
static processes involves rather too detailed a knowledge of gen-
eral physiology to be in place here.


===== PDF PAGE 207 =====



===== PDF PAGE 208 =====

V    Computing Machines and the Nervous System




Computing machines are essentially machines for recording
numbers, operating with numbers, and giving the result in
numerical form. A very considerable part of their cost, both
in money and in the effort of construction, goes to the simple
problem of recording numbers clearly and accurately. The sim-
plest mode of doing this seems to be on a uniform scale, with
a pointer of some sort moving over this. If we wish to record a
number with an accuracy of one part in n, we have to assure that
in each region of the scale the pointer assumes the desired posi-
tion within this accuracy. That is, for an amount of information
log2 n, we must finish each part of the movement of the pointer
with this degree of accuracy, and the cost will be of the form An,
where A is not too far from a constant. More precisely, since if
n − 1 regions are accurately established, the remaining region
will also be determined accurately, the cost of recording an
amount of information I will be about

(2 I − 1) A                                                (5.01)

Now let us divide this information over two scales, each marked
less accurately. The cost of recording this information will be
about


===== PDF PAGE 209 =====

160                                                       Chapter V




2 (2 I 2 − 1) A                                              (5.02)

If the information be divided among N scales, the approximate
cost will be

N (2 I N − 1) A                                              (5.03)

This will be a minimum when

             I IN
2I N − 1 =     2 log 2                                       (5.04)
             N

or if we put

I
  log 2 = x                                                  (5.05)
N

when

      ex − 1
x=           = 1 − e−x                                       (5.06)
        ex

This will occur when and only when x = 0, or N = ∞. That is, N
should be as large as possible to give the lowest cost for the stor-
age of information. Let us remember that 2I/N must be an integer,
and that 1 is not a significant value, as we then have an infinite
number of scales each containing no information. The best sig-
nificant value for 2I/N is 2, in which case we record our number
on a number of independent scales, each divided into two equal
parts. In other words, we represent our numbers in the binary
system on a number of scales in which all that we know is that
a certain quantity lies in one or the other of two equal portions
of the scale, and in which the probability of an imperfect knowl-
edge as to which half of the scale contains the observation is
made vanishingly small. In other words, we represent a number
ν in the form


===== PDF PAGE 210 =====

Computing Machines and the Nervous System                       161



           1      1          1
ν = ν0 +     ν1 + 2 ν 2 +  + ν n +                         (5.07)
           2     2           2n

where every νn is either 1 or 0.
   There exist at present two great types of computing machines:
those like the Bush differential analyzer,1 which are known as
analogy machines, where the data are represented by measure-
ments on some continuous scale, so that the accuracy of the
machine is determined by the accuracy of construction of the
scale; and those, like the ordinary desk adding and multiply-
ing machine, which we call numerical machines, where the data
are represented by a set of choices among a number of contin-
gencies, and the accuracy is determined by the sharpness with
which the contingencies are distinguished, the number of alter-
native contingencies presented at every choice, and the number
of choices given. We see that for highly accurate work, at any
rate, the numerical machines are preferable, and above all, those
numerical machines constructed on the binary scale, in which
the number of alternatives presented at each choice is two. Our
use of machines on the decimal scale is conditioned merely by
the historical accident that the scale of ten, based on our fingers
and thumbs, was already in use when the Hindus made the great
discovery of the importance of the zero and the advantage of
a positional system of notation. It is worth retaining when a
large part of the work done with the aid of the machine consists
in transcribing onto the machine numbers in the conventional
decimal form, and in taking off the machine numbers which
must be written in the same conventional form.
   This is, in fact, the use of the ordinary desk computing
machine, as employed in banks, in business offices, and in
many statistical laboratories. It is not the way that the larger and


===== PDF PAGE 211 =====

162                                                       Chapter V



more automatic machines are best to be employed; in general,
any computing machine is used because machine methods are
faster than hand methods. In any combined use of means of
computation, as in any combination of chemical reactions, it is
the slowest which gives the order of magnitude of the time con-
stants of the entire system. It is thus advantageous, as far as pos-
sible, to remove the human element from any elaborate chain
of computation and to introduce it only where it is absolutely
unavoidable, at the very beginning and the very end. Under
these conditions, it pays to have an instrument for the change of
the scale of notation, to be used initially and finally in the chain
of computations, and to perform all intermediate processes on
the binary scale.
   The ideal computing machine must then have all its data
inserted at the beginning, and must be as free as possible from
human interference to the very end. This means that not only
must the numerical data be inserted at the beginning, but also
all the rules for combining them, in the form of instructions
covering every situation which may arise in the course of the
computation. Thus the computing machine must be a logical
machine as well as an arithmetic machine and must combine
contingencies in accordance with a systematic algorithm. While
there are many algorithms which might be used for combining
contingencies, the simplest of these is known as the algebra of
logic par excellence, or the Boolean algebra. This algorithm, like
the binary arithmetic, is based on the dichotomy, the choice
between yes and no, the choice between being in a class and out-
side. The reasons for its superiority to other systems are of the
same nature as the reasons for the superiority of the binary arith-
metic over other arithmetics.


===== PDF PAGE 212 =====

Computing Machines and the Nervous System                         163



   Thus all the data, numerical or logical, put into the machine
are in the form of a set of choices between two alternatives, and
all the operations on the data take the form of making a set of
new choices depend on a set of old choices. When I add two
one-­digit numbers, A and B, I obtain a two-­digit number com-
mencing with 1, if A and B are both 1, and otherwise with 0.
The second digit is 1 if A ≠ B, and is otherwise 0. The addition
of numbers of more than one digit follows similar but more
complicated rules. Multiplication in the binary system, as in
the decimal, may be reduced to the multiplication table and the
addition of numbers, and the rules for multiplication for binary
numbers take on the peculiarly simple form given by the table

× 0 1
0 0 0                                                           (5.08)
1 0 1

Thus multiplication is simply a method to determine a set of
new digits when old digits are given.
   On the logical side, if O is a negative and I a positive decision,
every operator can be derived from three: negation, which trans-
forms I into O and O into I; logical addition, with the table

⊕ O I
O O I                                                           (5.09)
I I I

and logical multiplication, with the same table as the numerical
multiplication of the (1, 0) system, namely,

 O I
O O O                                                           (5.10)
I O I


===== PDF PAGE 213 =====

164                                                         Chapter V



That is, every contingency which may arise in the operation of
the machine simply demands a new set of choices of contin-
gencies I and O, depending according to a fixed set of rules on
the decisions already made. In other words, the structure of the
machine is that of a bank of relays, capable each of two condi-
tions, say “on” and “off”; while at each stage the relays assume
each a position dictated by the positions of some or all the relays
of the bank at a previous stage of operation. These stages of oper-
ation may be definitely “clocked” from some central clock or
clocks, or the action of each relay may be held up until all the
relays which should have acted earlier in the process have gone
through all the steps called for.
   The relays used in a computing machine may be of very var-
ied character. They may be purely mechanical, or they may be
electro-­mechanical, as in the case of a solenoidal relay, in which
the armature will remain in one of two possible positions of
equilibrium until an appropriate impulse pulls it to the other
side. They may be purely electrical systems with two alternative
positions of equilibrium, either in the form of gas-­filled tubes,
or, what is much more rapid, in the form of high-­vacuum tubes.
The two possible states of a relay system may both be stable in
the absence of outside interference, or only one may be stable,
while the other is transitory. Always in the second case and gen-
erally in the first case, it will be desirable to have special appara-
tus to retain an impulse which is to act at some future time, and
to avoid the clogging up of the system which will ensue if one
of the relays does nothing but repeat itself indefinitely. However,
we shall have more to say concerning this question of memory
later.
   It is a noteworthy fact that the human and animal ner-
vous systems, which are known to be capable of the work of a


===== PDF PAGE 214 =====

Computing Machines and the Nervous System                        165



computation system, contain elements which are ideally suited
to act as relays. These elements are the so-­called neurons or nerve
cells. While they show rather complicated properties under the
influence of electrical currents, in their ordinary physiological
action they conform very nearly to the “all-­or-­none” principle;
that is, they are either at rest, or when they “fire” they go through
a series of changes almost independent of the nature and inten-
sity of the stimulus. There is first an active phase, transmitted
from one end to the other of the neuron with a definite velocity,
to which there succeeds a refractory period during which the
neuron is either incapable of being stimulated, or at any rate is
not capable of being stimulated by any normal, physiological
process. At the end of this effective refractory period, the nerve
remains inactive, but may be stimulated again into activity.
   Thus the nerve may be taken to be a relay with essentially
two states of activity: firing and repose. Leaving aside those neu-
rons which accept their messages from free endings or sensory
end organs, each neuron has its message fed into it by other
neurons at points of contact known as synapses. For a given out-
going neuron, these vary in number from a very few to many
hundred. It is the state of the incoming impulses at the various
synapses, combined with the antecedent state of the outgoing
neuron itself, which determines whether it will fire or not. If it is
neither firing nor refractory, and the number of incoming syn-
apses which “fire” within a certain very short fusion interval of
time exceeds a certain threshold, then the neuron will fire after
a known, fairly constant synaptic delay.
   This is perhaps an oversimplification of the picture: the
“threshold” may not depend simply on the number of synapses
but on their “weight” and their geometrical relations to one
another with respect to the neuron into which they feed; and


===== PDF PAGE 215 =====

166                                                        Chapter V



there is very convincing evidence that there exist synapses of
a different nature, the so-­called “inhibitory synapses,” which
either completely prevent the firing of the outgoing neuron or
at any rate raise its threshold with respect to stimulation at the
ordinary synapses. What is pretty clear, however, is that some
definite combinations of impulses on the incoming neurons
having synaptic connections with a given neuron will cause it to
fire, while others will not cause it to fire. This is not to say that
there may not be other, non-­neuronic influences, perhaps of a
humoral nature, which produce slow, secular changes tending
to vary that pattern of incoming impulses which is adequate for
firing.
   A very important function of the nervous system, and, as
we have said, a function equally in demand for computing
machines, is that of memory, the ability to preserve the results
of past operations for use in the future. It will be seen that the
uses of the memory are highly various, and it is improbable that
any single mechanism can satisfy the demands of all of them.
There is first the memory which is necessary for the carrying
out of a current process, such as a multiplication, in which the
intermediate results are of no value once the process is com-
pleted, and in which the operating apparatus should then be
released for further use. Such a memory should record quickly,
be read quickly, and be erased quickly. On the other hand, there
is the memory which is intended to be part of the files, the per-
manent record, of the machine or the brain, and to contribute
to the basis of all its future behavior, at least during a single
run of the machine. Let it be remarked parenthetically that an
important difference between the way in which we use the brain
and the machine is that the machine is intended for many suc-
cessive runs, either with no reference to each other, or with a


===== PDF PAGE 216 =====

Computing Machines and the Nervous System                       167



minimal, limited reference, and that it can be cleared between
such runs; while the brain, in the course of nature, never even
approximately clears out its past records. Thus the brain, under
normal circumstances, is not the complete analogue of the com-
puting machine but rather the analogue of a single run on such
a machine. We shall see later that this remark has a deep signifi-
cance in psychopathology and in psychiatry.
   To return to the problem of memory, a very satisfactory
method for constructing a short-­
                                time memory is to keep a
sequence of impulses traveling around a closed circuit until
this circuit is cleared by intervention from outside. There is
much reason to believe that this happens in our brains during
the retention of impulses, which occurs over what is known as
the specious present. This method has been imitated in several
devices which have been used in computing machines, or at
least suggested for such a use. There are two conditions which
are desirable in such a retentive apparatus: the impulse should
be transmitted in a medium in which it is not too difficult to
achieve a considerable time lag; and before the errors inherent
in the instrument have blurred it too much, the impulse should
be reconstructed in a form as sharp as possible. The first condi-
tion tends to rule out delays produced by the transmission of
light, or even, in many cases, by electric circuits, while it favors
the use of one form or another of elastic vibrations; and such
vibrations have actually been employed for this purpose in com-
puting machines. If electric circuits are used for delay purposes,
the delay produced at every stage is relatively short; or, as in
all pieces of linear apparatus, the deformation of the message
is cumulative and very soon becomes intolerable. To avoid this,
a second consideration comes into play; we must insert some-
where in the cycle a relay which does not serve to repeat the form


===== PDF PAGE 217 =====

168                                                      Chapter V



of the incoming message but rather to trigger off a new message
of prescribed form. This is done very easily in the nervous sys-
tem, where indeed all transmission is more or less of a trigger
phenomenon. In the electrical industry, pieces of apparatus for
this purpose have long been known and have been used in con-
nection with telegraph circuits. They are known as telegraph-­type
repeaters. The great difficulty of using them for memories of long
duration is that they have to function without a flaw over an
enormous number of consecutive cycles of operation. Their suc-
cess is all the more remarkable: in a piece of apparatus designed
by Mr. Williams of the University of Manchester, a device of this
sort with a unit delay of the order of a hundredth of a second has
continued in successful operation for several hours. What makes
this more remarkable is that this apparatus was not used merely
to preserve a single decision, a single “yes” or “no,” but a matter
of thousands of decisions.
   Like other forms of apparatus intended to retain a large num-
ber of decisions, this works on the scanning principle. One of
the simplest modes of storing information for a relatively short
time is as the charge on a condenser; and when this is supple-
mented by a telegraph-­type repeater, it becomes an adequate
method of storage. To use to the best advantage the circuit facili-
ties attached to such a storage system, it is desirable to be able
to switch successively and very rapidly from one condenser to
another. The ordinary means of doing this involve mechanical
inertia, and this is never consistent with very high speeds. A
much better way is the use of a large number of condensers, in
which one plate is either a small piece of metal sputtered into a
dielectric, or the imperfectly insulating surface of the dielectric
itself, while one of the connectors to these condensers is a pen-
cil of cathode rays moved by the condensers and magnets of a


===== PDF PAGE 218 =====

Computing Machines and the Nervous System                    169



sweep circuit over a course like that of a plough in a ploughed
field. There are various elaborations of this method, which
indeed was employed in a somewhat different way by the Radio
Corporation of America before it was used by Mr. Williams.
  These last-­named methods for storing information can hold a
message for quite an appreciable time, if not for a period compa-
rable with a human lifetime. For more permanent records, there
is a wide variety of alternatives among which we can choose.
Leaving out such bulky, slow, and unerasable methods as the
use of punched cards and punched tape, we have magnetic
tape, together with its modern refinements, which have largely
eliminated the tendency of messages on this material to spread;
phosphorescent substances; and above all, photography. Pho-
tography is indeed ideal for the permanence and detail of its
records, ideal again from the point of view of the shortness of
exposure needed to record an observation. It suffers from two
grave disadvantages: the time needed for development, which
has been reduced to a few seconds, but is still not small enough
to make photography available for a short-­time memory; and (at
present [1947]) the fact that a photographic record is not sub-
ject to rapid erasure and the rapid implanting of a new record.
The Eastman people have been working on just these problems,
which do not seem to be necessarily insoluble, and it is possible
that by this time they have found the answer.
  Very many of the methods of storage of information already
considered have an important physical element in common.
They seem to depend on systems with a high degree of quantum
degeneracy, or, in other words, with a large number of modes
of vibration of the same frequency. This is certainly true in the
case of ferromagnetism, and is also true in the case of materials
with an exceptionally high dielectric constant, which are thus


===== PDF PAGE 219 =====

170                                                      Chapter V



especially valuable for use in condensers for the storage of infor-
mation. Phosphorescence as well is a phenomenon associated
with a high quantum degeneracy, and the same sort of effect
makes its appearance in the photographic process, where many
of the substances which act as developers seem to have a great
deal of internal resonance. Quantum degeneracy appears to be
associated with the ability to make small causes produce appre-
ciable and stable effects. We have already seen in Chapter II that
substances with high quantum degeneracy appear to be associ-
ated with many of the problems of metabolism and reproduc-
tion. It is probably not an accident that here, in a non-­living
environment, we find them associated with a third fundamen-
tal property of living matter: the ability to receive and organize
impulses and to make them effective in the outer world.
   We have seen in the case of photography and similar proc-
esses that it is possible to store a message in the form of a per-
manent alteration of certain storage elements. In reinserting
this information into the system, it is necessary to cause these
changes to affect the messages going through the system. One of
the simplest ways to do this is to have, as the storage elements
which are changed, parts which normally assist in the transmis-
sion of messages, and of such a nature that the change in their
character due to storage affects the manner in which they will
transport messages for the entire future. In the nervous system,
the neurons and the synapses are elements of this sort, and it is
quite plausible that information is stored over long periods by
changes in the thresholds of neurons, or, what may be regarded
as another way of saying the same thing, by changes in the per-
meability of each synapse to messages. Many of us think, in the
absence of a better explanation of the phenomenon, that the
storage of information in the brain can actually occur in this


===== PDF PAGE 220 =====

Computing Machines and the Nervous System                         171



way. It is conceivable for such a storage to take place either by
the opening of new paths or by the closure of old ones. Appar-
ently it is adequately established that no neurons are formed in
the brain after birth. It is possible, though not certain, that no
new synapses are formed, and it is a plausible conjecture that the
chief changes of thresholds in the memory process are increased.
If this is the case, our whole life is on the pattern of Balzac’s Peau
de Chagrin, and the very process of learning and remembering
exhausts our powers of learning and remembering until life itself
squanders our capital stock of power to live. It may well be that
this phenomenon does occur. This is a possible explanation for
a sort of senescence. The real phenomenon of senescence, how-
ever, is much too complicated to be explained in this way alone.
   We have already spoken of the computing machine, and
consequently the brain, as a logical machine. It is by no means
trivial to consider the light cast on logic by such machines, both
natural and artificial. Here the chief work is that of Turing.2 We
have said before that the machina ratiocinatrix is nothing but the
calculus ratiocinator of Leibniz with an engine in it; and just as
modern mathematical logic begins with this calculus, so it is
inevitable that its present engineering development should cast
a new light on logic. The science of today is operational; that is,
it considers every statement as essentially concerned with pos-
sible experiments or observable processes. According to this, the
study of logic must reduce to the study of the logical machine,
whether nervous or mechanical, with all its non-­removable limi-
tations and imperfections.
   It may be said by some readers that this reduces logic to psy-
chology, and that the two sciences are observably and demon-
strably different. This is true in the sense that many psychological
states and sequences of thought do not conform to the canons


===== PDF PAGE 221 =====

172                                                         Chapter V



of logic. Psychology contains much that is foreign to logic, but—­
and this is the important fact—­any logic which means anything
to us can contain nothing which the human mind—­and hence
the human nervous system—­is unable to encompass. All logic is
limited by the limitations of the human mind when it is engaged in
that activity known as logical thinking.
   For example, we devote much of mathematics to discussions
involving the infinite, but these discussions and their accompa-
nying proofs are not infinite in fact. No admissible proof involves
more than a finite number of stages. It is true, a proof by math-
ematical induction seems to involve an infinity of stages, but this
is only apparent. In fact, it involves just the following stages:

   1. Pn is a proposition involving the number n.

   2. Pn has been proved for n = 1.

   3. If Pn is true, Pn+1 is true.

   4. Therefore, Pn is true for every positive integer n.
   It is true that somewhere in our logical assumptions there must
be one which validates this argument. However, this mathemati-
cal induction is a far different thing from complete induction
over an infinite set. The same thing is true of the more refined
forms of mathematical induction, such as transfinite induction,
which occur in certain mathematical disciplines.
   Thus some very interesting situations arise, in which we may
be able—­with enough time and enough computational aids—­to
prove every single case of a theorem Pn; but if there is no sys-
tematic way of subsuming these proofs under a single argument
independent of n, such as we find in mathematical induction,
it may be impossible to prove Pn for all n. This contingency is


===== PDF PAGE 222 =====

Computing Machines and the Nervous System                          173



recognized in what is known as metamathematics, the discipline
so brilliantly developed by Gödel and his school.
   A proof represents a logical process which has come to a
definitive conclusion in a finite number of stages. However, a
logical machine following definite rules need never come to
a conclusion. It may go on grinding through different stages
without ever coming to a stop, either by describing a pattern of
activity of continually increasing complexity, or by going into a
repetitive process like the end of a chess game in which there is
a continuing cycle of perpetual check. This occurs in the case of
some of the paradoxes of Cantor and Russell. Let us consider the
class of all classes which are not members of themselves. Is this
class a member of itself? If it is, it is certainly not a member of
itself; and if it is not, it is equally certainly a member of itself. A
machine to answer this question would give the successive tem-
porary answers: “yes,” “no,” “yes,” “no,” and so on, and would
never come to equilibrium.
   Bertrand Russell’s solution of his own paradoxes was to affix
to every statement a quantity, the so-­called type, which serves
to distinguish between what seems to be formally the same
statement, according to the character of the objects with which
it concerns itself—­whether these are “things,” in the simplest
sense, classes of “things,” classes of classes of “things,” etc. The
method by which we resolve the paradoxes is also to attach a
parameter to each statement, this parameter being the time at
which it is asserted. In both cases, we introduce what we may
call a parameter of uniformization, to resolve an ambiguity
which is simply due to its neglect.
   We thus see that the logic of the machine resembles human
logic, and, following Turing, we may employ it to throw light
on human logic. Has the machine a more eminently human


===== PDF PAGE 223 =====

174                                                     Chapter V



characteristic as well—­the ability to learn? To see that it may
well have even this property, let us consider two closely related
notions: that of the association of ideas and that of the condi-
tioned reflex.
   In the British empirical school of philosophy, from Locke to
Hume, the content of the mind was considered to be made up of
certain entities known to Locke as ideas, and to the later authors
as ideas and impressions. The simple ideas or impressions were
supposed to exist in a purely passive mind, as free from influ-
ence on the ideas it contained as a clean blackboard is on the
symbols which may be written on it. By some sort of inner activ-
ity, hardly worthy to be called a force, these ideas were supposed
to unite themselves into bundles, according to the principles of
similarity, contiguity, and cause and effect. Of these principles,
perhaps the most significant was contiguity: ideas or impres-
sions which had often occurred together in time or in space were
supposed to have acquired the ability of evoking one another, so
that the presence of any one of them would produce the entire
bundle.
   In all this there is a dynamics implied, but the idea of a
dynamics had not yet filtered through from physics to the bio-
logical and psychological sciences. The typical biologist of the
eighteenth century was Linnaeus, the collector and classifier,
with a point of view quite opposed to that of the evolutionists,
the physiologists, the geneticists, the experimental embryolo-
gists of the present day. Indeed, with so much of the world to
explore, the state of mind of the biologists could hardly have
been different. Similarly, in psychology, the notion of mental
content dominated that of mental process. This may well have
been a survival of the scholastic emphasis on substances, in a
world in which the noun was hypostasized and the verb carried


===== PDF PAGE 224 =====

Computing Machines and the Nervous System                        175



little or no weight. Nevertheless, the step from these static ideas
to the more dynamic point of view of the present day, as exem-
plified in the work of Pavlov, is perfectly clear.
   Pavlov worked much more with animals than with men, and
he reported visible actions rather than introspective states of
mind. He found in dogs that the presence of food causes the
increased secretion of saliva and of gastric juice. If then a certain
visual object is shown to dogs in the presence of food and only
in the presence of food, the sight of this object in the absence of
food will acquire the property of being by itself able to stimulate
the flow of saliva or of gastric juice. The union by continguity
which Locke had observed introspectively in the case of ideas
now becomes a similar union of patterns of behavior.
   There is one important difference, however, between the
point of view of Pavlov and that of Locke, and it is precisely due
to this fact that Locke considers ideas and Pavlov patterns of
action. The responses observed by Pavlov tend to carry a process
to a successful conclusion or to avoid a catastrophe. Salivation is
important for deglutition and for digestion, while the avoidance
of what we should consider a painful stimulus tends to protect
the animal from bodily injury. Thus there enters into the condi-
tioned reflex something that we may call affective tone. We need
not associate this with our own sensations of pleasure and pain,
nor need we in the abstract associate it with the advantage of the
animal. The essential thing is this: that affective tone is arranged
on some sort of scale from negative “pain” to positive “plea-
sure”; that for a considerable time, or permanently, an increase
in affective tone favors all processes in the nervous system that
are under way at the time and gives them a secondary power
to increase affective tone; and that a decrease in affective tone


===== PDF PAGE 225 =====

176                                                     Chapter V



tends to inhibit all processes under way at the time and gives
them a secondary ability to decrease affective tone.
   Biologically speaking, of course, a greater affective tone must
occur predominantly in situations favorable for the perpetua-
tion of the race, if not the individual, and a smaller affective
tone in situations which are unfavorable for this perpetuation, if
not disastrous. Any race not conforming to this requirement will
go the way of Lewis Carroll’s Bread-­and-­Butter Fly, and always
die. Nevertheless, even a doomed race may show a mechanism
valid so long as the race lasts. In other words, even the most
suicidal apportioning of affective tone will produce a definite
pattern of conduct.
   Note that the mechanism of affective tone is itself a feedback
mechanism. It may even be given a diagram such as shown
in Fig. 7.
   Here the totalizer for affective tone combines the affective
tones given by the separate affective-­tone mechanisms over a
short interval in the past, according to some rule which we need
not specify now. The leads back to the individual affective-­tone




Fig. 7


===== PDF PAGE 226 =====

Computing Machines and the Nervous System                       177



mechanisms serve to modify the intrinsic affective tone of each
process in the direction of the output of the totalizer, and this
modification stands until it is modified by later messages from
the totalizer. The leads back from the totalizer to the process
mechanisms serve to lower thresholds if the total affective tone
is increasing, and to raise them if the total affective tone is
decreasing. They likewise have a longtime effect, which endures
until it is modified by another impulse from the totalizer. This
lasting effect, however, is confined to those processes actually in
being at the time the return message arrives, and a similar limi-
tation also applies to the effects on the individual affective-­tone
mechanisms.
   I wish to emphasize that I do not say that the process of
the conditioned reflex operates according to the mechanism I
have given; I merely say that it could so operate. If, however, we
assume this or any simular mechanism, there are a good many
things we can say concerning it. One is that this mechanism
is capable of learning. It has already been recognized that the
conditioned reflex is a learning mechanism, and this idea has
been used in the behaviorist studies of the learning of rats in
a maze. All that is needed is that the inducements or punish-
ments used have, respectively, a positive and a negative affective
tone. This is certainly the case, and the experimenter learns the
nature of this affective tone by experience, not simply by a priori
considerations.
   Another point of considerable interest is that such a mecha-
nism involves a certain set of messages which go out generally
into the nervous system, to all elements which are in a state to
receive them. These are the return messages from the affective-­
tone totalizer, and to a certain extent the messages from the
affective-­tone mechanisms to the totalizers. Indeed, the totalizer


===== PDF PAGE 227 =====

178                                                     Chapter V



need not be a separate element but may merely represent some
natural combinatory effect of messages arriving from the indi-
vidual affective-­
                 tone mechanisms. Now, such messages ‘‘to
whom it may concern” may well be sent out most efficiently,
with a smallest cost in apparatus, by channels other than ner-
vous. In a similar manner, the ordinary communication system
of a mine may consist of a telephone central with the attached
wiring and pieces of apparatus. When we want to empty a mine
in a hurry, we do not trust to this, but break a tube of a mercap-
tan in the air intake. Chemical messengers like this, or like the
hormones, are the simplest and most effective for a message not
addressed to a specific recipient. For the moment, let me break
into what I know to be pure fancy. The high emotional and con-
sequently affective content of hormonal activity is most sugges-
tive. This does not mean that a purely nervous mechanism is
not capable of affective tone and of learning, but it does mean
that in the study of this aspect of our mental activity, we can-
not afford to be blind to the possibilities of hormonal transmis-
sion. It may be excessively fanciful to attach this notion to the
fact that in the theories of Freud the memory—­the storage func-
tion of the nervous system—­and the activities of sex are both
involved. Sex, on the one hand, and all affective content, on the
other, contain a very strong hormonal element. This suggestion
of the importance of sex and hormones has been made to me by
Dr. J. Lettvin and Mr. Oliver Selfridge, While at present there is
no adequate evidence to prove its validity, it is not manifestly
absurd in principle.
  There is nothing in the nature of the computing machine
which forbids it to show conditioned reflexes. Let us remember
that a computing machine in action is more than the concatena-
tion of relays and storage mechanisms which the designer has


===== PDF PAGE 228 =====

Computing Machines and the Nervous System                      179



built into it. It also contains the content of its storage mecha-
nisms, and this content is never completely cleared in the course
of a single run. We have already seen that it is the run rather
than the entire existence of the mechanical structure of the com-
puting machine which corresponds to the life of the individual.
We have also seen that in the nervous computing machine it is
highly probable that information is stored largely as changes in
the permeability of the synapses, and it is perfectly possible to
construct artificial machines where information is stored in that
way. It is perfectly possible, for example, to cause any message
going into storage to change in a permanent or semi-­permanent
way the grid bias of one or of a number of vacuum tubes, and
thus to alter the numerical value of the summation of impulses
which will make the tube or tubes fire.
   A more detailed account of learning apparatus in comput-
ing and control machines, and the uses to which it may be put,
may well be left to the engineer rather than to a preliminary
book like this one. It is perhaps better to devote the rest of this
chapter to the more developed, normal uses of modern com-
puting machines. One of the chief of these is in the solution
of partial differential equations. Even linear partial differential
equations require the recording of an enormous mass of data
to set them up, as the data involve the accurate description of
functions of two or more variables. With equations of the hyper-
bolic type, like the wave equation, the typical problem is that
of solving the equation when the initial data are given, and this
can be done in a progressive manner from the initial data to the
results at any given later time. This is largely true of equations
of the parabolic type as well. When it comes to equations of the
elliptic type, where the natural data are boundary values rather
than initial values, the natural methods of solution involve an


===== PDF PAGE 229 =====

180                                                    Chapter V



iterative process of successive approximation. This process is
repeated a very large number of times, so that very fast methods,
such as those of the modern computing machine, are almost
indispensable.
  In non-­linear partial differential equations, we miss what we
have in the case of the linear equations—­a reasonably adequate,
purely mathematical theory. Here computational methods are
not only important for the handling of particular numerical
cases, but, as von Neumann has pointed out, we need them in
order to form that acquaintance with a large number of partic-
ular cases without which we can scarcely formulate a general
theory. To some extent this has been done with the aid of very
expensive experimental apparatus, such as wind tunnels. It is in
this way that we have become acquainted with the more com-
plicated properties of shock waves, slip surfaces, turbulence,
and the like, for which we are scarcely in a position to give an
adequate mathematical theory. How many undiscovered phe-
nomena of similar nature there may be, we do not know. The
analogue machines are so much less accurate, and in many cases
so much slower, than the digital machines that the latter give us
much more promise for the future.
  It is already becoming clear in the use of these new machines
that they demand purely mathematical techniques of their own,
quite different from those in use in manual computation or in
the use of machines of smaller capacity. For example, even the
use of machines for computing determinants of moderately
high order or for the simultaneous solution of twenty or thirty
simultaneous linear equations shows difficulties which do not
arise when we study analogous problems of small order. Unless
care is exercised in setting up a problem, these may completely
deprive the solution of any significant figures whatever. It is


===== PDF PAGE 230 =====

Computing Machines and the Nervous System                     181



a commonplace to say that fine, effective tools like the ultra-­
rapid computing machine are out of place in the hands of those
not possessing a sufficient degree of technical skill to take full
advantage of them. The ultra-­
                             rapid computing machine will
certainly not decrease the need for mathematicians with a high
level of understanding and technical training. In the mechani-
cal or electrical construction of computing machines, there are
a few maxims which deserve consideration. One is that mech-
anisms which are relatively frequently used, such as multiply-
ing or adding mechanisms, should be in the form of relatively
standardized assemblages adapted for one particular use and no
other, while those of more occasional use should be assembled
for the moment of use out of elements also available for other
purposes. Closely related to this consideration is the one that in
these more general mechanisms the component parts should be
available in accordance with their general properties, and should
not be allotted permanently to a specific association with other
pieces of apparatus. There should be some part of the appara-
tus, like an automatic telephone-­switching exchange, which will
search for free components and connectors of the various sorts
and allot them as they are needed. This will eliminate much of
the very large expense which is due to having a great number of
unused elements which cannot be used unless their entire large
assembly is used. We shall find this principle is very important
when we come to consider traffic problems and overloading in
the nervous system.
  As a final remark, let me point out that a large computing
machine, whether in the form of mechanical or electric appa-
ratus or in the form of the brain itself, uses up a considerable
amount of power, all of which is wasted and dissipated in heat.
The blood leaving the brain is a fraction of a degree warmer


===== PDF PAGE 231 =====

182                                                     Chapter V



than that entering it. No other computing machine approaches
the economy of energy of the brain. In a large apparatus like
the Eniac or Edvac, the filaments of the tubes consume a quan-
tity of energy which may well be measured in kilowatts, and
unless adequate ventilating and cooling apparatus is provided,
the system will suffer from what is the mechanical equivalent of
pyrexia, until the constants of the machine are radically changed
by the heat, and its performance breaks down. Nevertheless, the
energy spent per individual operation is almost vanishingly
small, and does not even begin to form an adequate measure of
the performance of the apparatus. The mechanical brain does
not secrete thought “as the liver does bile,” as the earlier mate-
rialists claimed, nor does it put it out in the form of energy, as
the muscle puts out its activity. Information is information, not
matter or energy. No materialism which does not admit this can
survive at the present day.


===== PDF PAGE 232 =====

VI Gestalt and Universals




Among other things which we have discussed in the previous
chapter is the possibility of assigning a neural mechanism to
Locke’s theory of the association of ideas. According to Locke,
this occurs according to three principles: the principle of conti-
guity, the principle of similarity, and the principle of cause and
effect. The third of these is reduced by Locke, and even more
definitively by Hume, to nothing more than constant concomi-
tance, and so is subsumed under the first, that of contiguity. The
second, that of similarity, deserves a more detailed discussion.
   How do we recognize the identity of the features of a man,
whether we see him in profile, in three-­quarters face, or in full
face? How do we recognize a circle as a circle, whether it is large
or small, near or far; whether, in fact, it is in a plane perpendicu-
lar to a line from the eye meeting it in the middle, and is seen as
a circle, or has some other orientation, and is seen as an ellipse?
How do we see faces and animals and maps in clouds, or in the
blots of a Rorschach test? All these examples refer to the eye,
but similar problems extend to the other senses, and some of
them have to do with intersensory relations. How do we put into
words the call of a bird or the stridulations of an insect? How do
we identify the roundness of a coin by touch?


===== PDF PAGE 233 =====

184                                                     Chapter VI



   For the present, let us confine ourselves to the sense of
vision. One important factor in the comparison of form of dif-
ferent objects is certainly the interaction of the eye and the
muscles, whether they are the muscles within the eyeball, the
muscles moving the eyeball, the muscles moving the head, or
the muscles moving the body as a whole. Indeed, some form of
this visual-­muscular feedback system is important as low in the
animal kingdom as the flatworms. There the negative phototro-
pism, the tendency to avoid the light, seems to be controlled by
the balance of the impulses from the two eyespots. This balance
is fed back to the muscles of the trunk, turning the body away
from the light, and, in combination with the general impulse to
move forward, carries the animal into the darkest region acces-
sible. It is interesting to note that a combination of a pair of
photocells with appropriate amplifiers, a Wheatstone bridge for
balancing their outputs, and further amplifiers controlling the
input into the two motors of a twinscrew mechanism would
give us a very adequate negatively phototropic control for a little
boat. It would be difficult or impossible for us to compress this
mechanism into the dimensions that a flatworm can carry; but
here we merely have another exemplification of the fact that
must by now be familiar to the reader, that living mechanisms
tend to have a much smaller space scale than the mechanisms
best suited to the techniques of human artificers, although, on
the other hand, the use of electrical techniques gives the artifi-
cial mechanism an enormous advantage in speed over the living
organism.
   Without going through all the intermediate stages, let us
come at once to the eye-­muscle feedbacks in man. Some of these
are of purely homeostatic nature, as when the pupil opens in
the dark and closes in the light, thus tending to confine the


===== PDF PAGE 234 =====

Gestalt and Universals                                         185



flow of light into the eye between narrower bounds than would
otherwise be possible. Others concern the fact that the human
eye has economically confined its best form and color vision to
a relatively small fovea, while its perception of motion is bet-
ter on the periphery. When the peripheral vision has picked
up some object conspicuous by brilliancy or light contrast or
color or above all by motion, there is a reflex feedback to bring
it into the fovea. This feedback is accompanied by a compli-
cated system of interlinked subordinate feedbacks, which tend
to converge the two eyes so that the object attracting attention
is in the same part of the visual field of each, and to focus the
lens so that its outlines are as sharp as possible. These actions
are supplemented by motions of the head and body, by which
we bring the object into the center of vision if this cannot be
done readily by a motion of the eyes alone, or by which we
bring an object outside the visual field picked up by some
other sense into that field. In the case of objects with which
we are more familiar in one angular orientation than another—­
writing, human faces, landscapes, and the like—­
                                               there is also
a mechanism by which we tend to pull them into the proper
orientation.
   All these processes can be summed up in one sentence: we
tend to bring any object that attracts our attention into a stan-
dard position and orientation, so that the visual image which
we form of it varies within as small a range as possible. This does
not exhaust the processes which are involved in perceiving the
form and meaning of the object, but it certainly facilitates all
later processes tending to this end. These later processes occur in
the eye and in the visual cortex. There is considerable evidence
that for a considerable number of stages each step in this pro-
cess diminishes the number of neuron channels involved in the


===== PDF PAGE 235 =====

186                                                     Chapter VI



transmission of visual information, and brings this information
one step nearer to the form in which it is used and is preserved
in the memory.
   The first step in this concentration of visual information
occurs in the transition between the retina and the optic nerve.
It will be noted that while in the fovea there is almost a one-­one
correspondence between the rods and cones and the fibers of the
optic nerve, the correspondence on the periphery is such that
one optic nerve fiber corresponds to ten or more end organs.
This is quite understandable, in view of the fact that the chief
function of the peripheral fibers is not so much vision itself as
a pickup for the centering and focusing-­directing mechanism of
the eye.
   One of the most remarkable phenomena of vision is our abil-
ity to recognize an outline drawing. Clearly, an outline drawing
of, say, the face of a man, has very little resemblance to the face
itself in color, or in the massing of light and shade, yet it may
be a most recognizable portrait of its subject. The most plausible
explanation of this is that, somewhere in the visual process, out-
lines are emphasized and some other aspects of an image are
minimized in importance. The beginning of these processes is in
the eye itself. Like all senses, the retina is subject to accommo-
dation; that is, the constant maintenance of a stimulus reduces
its ability to receive and to transmit that stimulus. This is most
markedly so for the receptors which record the interior of a large
block of images with constant color and illumination, for even
the slight fluctuations of focus and point of fixation which are
inevitable in vision do not change the character of the image
received. It is quite different on the boundary of two contrasting
regions. Here these fluctuations produce an alternation between
one stimulus and another, and this alternation, as we see in the


===== PDF PAGE 236 =====

Gestalt and Universals                                          187



phenomenon of after-­images, not only does not tend to exhaust
the visual mechanism by accommodation but even tends to
enhance its sensitivity. This is true whether the contrast between
the two adjacent regions is one of light intensity or of color. As
a comment on these facts, let us note that three-­quarters of the
fibers in the optic nerve respond only to the flashing “on” of
illumination. We thus find that the eye receives its most intense
impression at boundaries, and that every visual image in fact has
something of the nature of a line drawing.
   Probably not all of this action is peripheral. In photography, it
is known that certain treatments of a plate increase its contrasts,
and such phenomena, which are of non-­linearity, are certainly
not beyond what the nervous system can do. They are allied to
the phenomena of the telegraph-­type repeater, which we have
already mentioned. Like this, they use an impression which
has not been blurred beyond a certain point to trigger a new
impression of a standard sharpness. At any rate, they decrease
the total unusable information carried by an image, and are
probably correlated with a part of the reduction of the num-
ber of transmission fibers found at various stages of the visual
cortex.
   We have thus designated several actual or possible stages
of the diagrammatization of our visual impressions. We cen-
ter our images around the focus of attention and reduce them
more or less to outlines. We have now to compare them with
one another, or at any rate with a standard impression stored
in memory, such as “circle” or “square.” This may be done in
several ways. We have given a rough sketch which indicates how
the Lockean principle of contiguity in association may be mech-
anized. Let us notice that the principle of contiguity also covers
much of the other Lockean principle of similarity. The different


===== PDF PAGE 237 =====

188                                                     Chapter VI



aspects of the same object are often to be seen in those processes
which bring it to the focus of attention, and of other motions
which lead us to see it, now at one distance and now at another,
now from one angle and now from a distinct one. This is a gen-
eral principle, not confined in its application to any particular
sense and doubtless of much importance in the comparison of
our more complicated experiences. It is nevertheless probably
not the only process which leads to the formation of our specifi-
cally visual general ideas, or, as Locke would call them, “complex
ideas.” The structure of our visual cortex is too highly organized,
too specific, to lead us to suppose that it operates by what is
after all a highly generalized mechanism. It leaves us the impres-
sion that we are here dealing with a special mechanism which is
not merely a temporary assemblage of general-­purpose elements
with interchangeable parts, but a permanent sub-­assembly like
the adding and multiplying assemblies of a computing machine.
Under the circumstances, it is worth considering how such a
sub-­assembly might possibly work and how we should go about
designing it.
   The possible perspective transformations of an object form
what is known as a group, in the sense in which we have already
defined one in Chapter II. This group defines several sub-­groups
of transformations: the affine group, in which we consider
only those transformations which leave the region at infinity
untouched; the homogeneous dilations about a given point, in
which one point, the directions of the axes, and the equality of
scale in all directions are preserved; the transformations preserv-
ing length; the rotations in two or three dimensions about a
point; the set of all translations; and so on. Among these groups,
the ones we have just mentioned are continuous; that is, the
operations belonging to them are determined by the values of


===== PDF PAGE 238 =====

Gestalt and Universals                                        189



a number of continuously varying parameters in an appropri-
ate space. They thus form multidimensional configurations in
n-­space, and contain sub-­sets of transformations which consti-
tute regions in such a space.
   Now, just as a region in the ordinary two-­dimensional plane
is covered by the process of scanning known to the television
engineer, by which a nearly uniformly distributed set of sam-
ple positions in that region is taken to represent the whole,
so every region in a group-­space, including the whole of such
a space, can be represented by a process of group scanning. In
such a process, which is by no means confined to a space of
three dimensions, a net of positions in the space is traversed
in a one-­dimensional sequence, and this net of positions is so
distributed that it comes near to every position in the region, in
some appropriately defined sense. It will thus contain positions
as near to any we wish as may be desired. If these “positions,”
or sets of parameters, are actually used to generate the appro-
priate transformations, it means that the results of transform-
ing a given figure by these transformations will come as near
as we wish to any given transformation of the figure by a trans-
formation operator lying in the region desired. If our scanning
is fine enough, and the region transformed has the maximum
dimensionality of the regions transformed by the group consid-
ered, this means that the transformations actually traversed will
give a resulting region overlapping any transform of the original
region by an amount which is as large a fraction of its area as
we wish.
   Let us then start with a fixed comparison region and a region
to be compared with it. If at any stage of the scanning of the
group of transformations the image of the region to be com-
pared under some one of the transformations scanned coincides


===== PDF PAGE 239 =====

190                                                     Chapter VI



more perfectly with the fixed pattern than a given tolerance
allows, this is recorded, and the two regions are said to be alike.
If this happens at no stage of the scanning process, they are
said to be unlike. This process is perfectly adapted to mecha-
nization, and serves as a method to identify the shape of a fig-
ure independently of its size or its orientation or of whatever
transformations may be included in the group-­
                                             region to be
scanned.
   If this region is not the entire group, it may well be that
region A seems like region B, and that region B seems like
region C, while region A does not seem like region C. This cer-
tainly happens in reality. A figure may not show any particular
resemblance to the same figure inverted, at least in so far as the
immediate impression—­
                     one not involving any of the higher
processes—­is concerned. Nevertheless, at each stage of its inver-
sion, there may be a considerable range of neighboring positions
which appear similar. The universal “ideas” thus formed are not
perfectly distinct but shade into one another.
   There are other more sophisticated means of using group
scanning to abstract from the transformations of a group. The
groups which we here consider have a “group measure,” a prob-
ability density which depends on the transformation group itself
and does not change when all the transformations of the group
are altered by being preceded or followed by any specific trans-
formation of the group. It is possible to scan the group in such
a way that the density of scanning of any region of a consider-
able class—­that is, the amount of time which the variable scan-
ning element passes within the region in any complete scanning
of the group—­is closely proportional to its group measure. In
the case of such a uniform scanning, if we have any quantity
depending on a set S of elements transformed by the group, and


===== PDF PAGE 240 =====

Gestalt and Universals                                          191



if this set of elements is transformed by all the transformations
of the group, let us designate the quantity depending on S by
Q(S), and let us use TS to express the transform of the set S by the
transformation T of the group. Then Q(TS) will be the value of
the quantity replacing Q(S) when S is replaced by TS. If we aver-
age or integrate this with respect to the group measure for the
group of transformations T, we shall obtain a quantity which we
may write in some such form as

∫ Q (TS ) dT                                                 (6.01)

where the integration is over the group measure. Quantity 6.01
will be identical for all sets S interchangeable with one another
under the transformations of the group, that is, for all sets S
which have in some sense the same form or Gestalt. It is pos-
sible to obtain an approximate comparability of form where the
integration in Quantity 6.01 is over less than the whole group,
if the integrand Q(TS) is small over the region omitted. So much
for group measure.
   In recent years, there has been a good deal of attention to the
problem of the prosthesis of one lost sense by another. The most
dramatic of the attempts to accomplish this has been the design
of reading devices for the blind, to work by the use of photo-
electric cells. We shall suppose that these efforts are confined to
printed matter, and even to a single type face or to a small num-
ber of type faces. We shall also suppose that the alignment of
the page, the centering of the lines, the traverse from line to line
are taken care of either manually or, as they may well be, auto-
matically. These processes correspond, as we may see, to the part
of our visual Gestalt determination which depends on muscular
feedbacks and the use of our normal centering, orienting, focus-
ing, and converging apparatus. There now ensues the problem


===== PDF PAGE 241 =====

192                                                       Chapter VI



of determining the shapes of the individual letters as the scan-
ning apparatus passes over them in sequence. It has been sug-
gested that this be done by the use of several photoelectric cells
placed in a vertical sequence, each attached to a sound-­making
apparatus of a different pitch. This can be done with the black of
the letters registering either as silence or as sound. Let us assume
the latter case, and let us assume three photocell receptors above
one another. Let them record as the three notes of a chord, let
us say, with the highest note on top and the lowest note below.
Then the letter capital F, let us say, will record

——————          Duration of upper note

————­	 Duration of middle note

—­		            Duration of lower note

The letter capital Z will record

——————

—­
——————

the letter capital O

—­

—­	        —­

—­

and so on. With the ordinary help given by our ability to inter-
pret, it should not be too difficult to read such an auditory code,
not more difficult than to read Braille, for instance.
      However, all this depends on one thing: the proper relation
of the photocells to the vertical height of the letters. Even with
standardized type faces, there still are great variations in the size


===== PDF PAGE 242 =====

Gestalt and Universals                                          193



of the type. Thus it is desirable for us to be able to pull the ver-
tical scale of the scanning up or down, in order to reduce the
impression of a given letter to a standard. We must at least have
at our disposal, manually or automatically, some of the transfor-
mations of the vertical dilation group.
   There are several ways we might do this. We might allow for a
mechanical vertical adjustment of our photocells. On the other
hand, we might use a rather large vertical array of photocells
and change the pitch assignment with the size of type, leaving
those above and below the type silent. This may be done, for
example, with the aid of a schema of two sets of connectors, the
inputs coming up from the photocells, and leading to a series
of switches of wider and wider divergence, and the outputs a
series of vertical lines, as in Fig. 8. Here the single lines repre-
sent the leads from the photocells, the double lines the leads to
the oscillators, the circles on the dotted lines the points of con-
nections between incoming and outgoing leads, and the dotted
lines themselves the leads whereby one or another of a bank of
oscillators is put into action. This was the device, to which we
have referred in the introduction, designed by McCulloch for
the purpose of adjusting to the height of the type face. In the
first design, the selection between dotted line and dotted line
was manual.




Fig. 8


===== PDF PAGE 243 =====

194                                                      Chapter VI



   This was the figure which, when shown to Dr. von Bonin, sug-
gested the fourth layer of the visual cortex. It was the connect-
ing circles which suggested the neuron cell bodies of this layer,
arranged in sub-­layers of uniformly changing horizontal density,
and size changing in the opposite direction to the density. The
horizontal leads are probably fired in some cyclical order. The
whole apparatus seems quite suited to the process of group scan-
ning. There must of course be some process of recombination in
time of the upper outputs.
   This then was the device suggested by McCulloch as that
actually used in the brain in the detection of visual Gestalt. It
represents a type of device usable for any sort of group scanning.
Something similar occurs in other senses as well. In the ear, the
transposition of music from one fundamental pitch to another
is nothing but a translation of the logarithm of the frequency,
and may consequently be performed by a group-­
                                             scanning
apparatus.
   A group-­scanning assembly thus has well-­defined, appropri-
ate anatomical structure. The necessary switching may be per-
formed by independent horizontal leads which furnish enough
stimulation to shift the thresholds in each level to just the proper
amount to make them fire when the lead comes on. While we do
not know all the details of the performance of the machinery, it
is not at all difficult to conjecture a possible machine conform-
ing to the anatomy. In short, the group-­scanning assembly is
well adapted to form the sort of permanent sub-­assembly of the
brain corresponding to the adders or multipliers of the numeri-
cal computing machine.
   Lastly, the scanning apparatus should have a certain intrin-
sic period of operation which should be identifiable in the per-
formance of the brain. The order of magnitude of this period


===== PDF PAGE 244 =====

Gestalt and Universals                                          195



should show in the minimum time required for making direct
comparison of the shapes of objects different in size. This can be
done only when the comparison is between two objects not too
different in size; otherwise, it is a long-­time process, suggestive
of the action of a non-­specific assembly. When direct compari-
son seems to be possible, it appears to take a time of the order
of magnitude of a tenth of a second. This also seems to accord
with the order of magnitude of the time needed by excitation
to stimulate all the layers of transverse connectors in cyclical
sequence.
   While this cyclical process then might be a locally deter-
mined one, there is evidence that there is a widespread synchro-
nism in different parts of the cortex, suggesting that it is driven
from some clocking center. In fact, it has the order of frequency
appropriate for the alpha rhythm of the brain, as shown in elec-
troencephalograms. We may suspect that this alpha rhythm
is associated with form perception, and that it partakes of the
nature of a sweep rhythm, like the rhythm shown in the scan-
ning process of a television apparatus. It disappears in deep sleep,
and seems to be obscured and overlaid with other rhythms,
precisely as we might expect, when we are actually looking at
something and the sweep rhythm is acting as something like a
carrier for other rhythms and activities. It is most marked when
the eyes are closed in waking, or when we are staring into space
at nothing in particular, as in the condition of abstraction of a
yogi,1 when it shows an almost perfect periodicity.
   We have just seen that the problem of sensory prosthesis—­
the problem of replacing the information normally conveyed
through a lost sense by information through another sense
still available—­
                is important and not necessarily insoluble.
What makes it more hopeful is the fact that the memory and


===== PDF PAGE 245 =====

196                                                      Chapter VI



association areas, normally approached through one sense, are
not locks with a single key but are available to store impressions
gathered from other senses than the one to which they normally
belong. A blinded man, as distinguished perhaps from one con-
genitally blind, not only retains visual memories earlier in date
than his accident but is even able to store tactile and auditory
impressions in a visual form. He may feel his way around a room,
and yet have an image of how it ought to look.
   Thus, part of his normal visual mechanism is accessible to
him. On the other hand, he has lost more than his eyes: he has
also lost the use of that part of his visual cortex which may be
regarded as a fixed assembly for organizing the impressions of
sight. It is necessary to equip him not only with artificial visual
receptors but with an artificial visual cortex, which will translate
the light impressions on his new receptors into a form so related
to the normal output of his visual cortex that objects which ordi-
narily look alike will now sound alike.
   Thus the criterion of the possibility of such a replacement
of sight by hearing is at least in part a comparison between the
number of recognizably different visual patterns and recog-
nizably different auditory patterns at the cortical level. This is a
comparison of amounts of information. In view of the some-
what similar organization of the different parts of the sensory
cortex, it will probably not differ very much from a comparison
between the areas of the two parts of the cortex. This is about
100:1 as between sight and sound. If all the auditory cortex were
used for vision, we might expect to get a quantity of reception of
information about 1 per cent of that coming in through the eye.
On the other hand, our usual scale for the estimation of vision is
in terms of the relative distance at which a certain degree of reso-
lution of pattern is obtained, and thus a 10/100 vision means


===== PDF PAGE 246 =====

Gestalt and Universals                                             197



an amount of flow of information about 1 per cent of normal.
This is very poor vision; it is, however, definitely not blindness,
nor do people with this amount of vision necessarily consider
themselves as blind.
   In the other direction, the picture is even more favorable. The
eye can detect all of the nuances of the ear with the use of only
1 per cent of its facilities, and still leave a vision of about 95/100,
which is substantially perfect. Thus the problem of sensory pros-
thesis is an extremely hopeful field of work.


===== PDF PAGE 247 =====



===== PDF PAGE 248 =====

VII Cybernetics and Psychopathology




It is necessary that I commence this chapter with a disavowal.
On the one hand, I am not a psychopathologist nor a psychia-
trist, and lack any experience in a field where the guidance of
experience is the only trustworthy one. On the other hand,
our knowledge of the normal performance of the brain and the
nervous system, and a fortiori our knowledge of their abnormal
performance, is far from having reached that state of perfec-
tion where an a priori theory can command any confidence. I
therefore wish to disclaim in advance any assertion that any
particular entity in psychopathology, as for example any of the
morbid conditions described by Kraepelin and his disciples, is
due to a specific type of defect in the organization of the brain
as a computing machine. Those who may draw such specific
conclusions from the considerations of this book do so at their
own risk.
  Nevertheless, the realization that the brain and the com-
puting machine have much in common may suggest new and
valid approaches to psychopathology and even to psychiatries.
These begin with perhaps the simplest question of all: how the
brain avoids gross blunders, gross miscarriages of activity, due
to the malfunction of individual components. Similar questions


===== PDF PAGE 249 =====

200                                                       Chapter VII



referring to the computing machine are of great practical impor-
tance, for here a chain of operations, each covering a fraction
of a millisecond, may last a matter of hours or days. It is quite
possible for a chain of computational operations to involve 109
separate steps. Under these circumstances, the chance that at
least one operation will go amiss is very far from negligible, even
though, it is true, the reliability of modern electronic apparatus
has far exceeded the most sanguine expectations.
   In ordinary computational practice by hand or by desk
machines, it is the custom to check every step of the computa-
tion and, when an error is found, to localize it by a backward
process starting from the first point where the error is noted. To
do this with a high-­speed machine, the check must proceed with
the speed of the original machine, or the whole effective order
of speed of the machine will conform to that of the slower pro-
cess of checking. Furthermore, if the machine is made to keep
all intermediate records of its performance, its complication and
bulk will be increased to an intolerable point, by a factor which
is likely to be enormously greater than 2 or 3.
   A much better method of checking, and in fact the one gener-
ally used in practice, is to refer every operation simultaneously
to two or three separate mechanisms. In the case of the use of
two such mechanisms, their answers are automatically collated
against each other; and if there is a discrepancy, all data are trans-
ferred to permanent storage, the machine stops, and a signal is
sent to the operator that something is wrong. The operator then
compares the results, and is guided by them in his search for the
malfunctioning part, perhaps a tube which has burnt out and
needs replacement. If three separate mechanisms are used for
each stage and single misfunctions are as rare as they are in fact,
there will practically always be an agreement between two of


===== PDF PAGE 250 =====

Cybernetics and Psychopathology                                201



the three mechanisms, and this agreement will give the required
result. In this case, the collation mechanism accepts the major-
ity report, and the machine need not stop; but there is a signal
indicating where and how the minority report differs from the
majority report. If this occurs at the first moment of discrepancy,
the indication of the position of the error may be very precise.
In a well-­designed machine, no particular element is assigned
to a particular stage in the sequence of operations, but at each
stage there is a searching process, quite similar to that used in
automatic telephone exchanges, which finds the first available
element of a given sort and switches it into the sequence of oper-
ations. In this case, the removal and replacement of defective
elements need not be the source of any appreciable delay.
   It is conceivable and not implausible that at least two of
the elements of this process are also represented in the ner-
vous system. We can hardly expect that any important message
is entrusted for transmission to a single neuron, nor that any
important operation is entrusted to a single neuronal mecha-
nism. Like the computing machine, the brain probably works
on a variant of the famous principle expounded by Lewis Carroll
in The Hunting of the Snark: “What I tell you three times is true.”
It is also improbable that the various channels available for the
transfer of information generally go from one end of their course
to the other without anastomosing. It is much more probable
that when a message comes in to a certain level of the nervous
system, it may leave that point and proceed to the next by one
or more alternative members of what is known as an “internun-
cial pool.” There may be parts of the nervous system, indeed,
where this interchangeability is much limited or abolished, and
these are likely to be such highly specialized parts of the cortex
as those which serve as the inward extensions of the organs of


===== PDF PAGE 251 =====

202                                                     Chapter VII



special sense. Still, the principle holds, and probably holds most
clearly for the relatively unspecialized cortical areas which serve
the purpose of association and of what we call the higher mental
functions.
   So far we have been considering errors in performance which
are normal, and pathological only in an extended sense. Let
us now turn to those which are much more clearly pathologi-
cal. Psychopathology has been rather a disappointment to the
instinctive materialism of the doctors, who have taken the point
of view that every disorder must be accompanied by material
lesions of some specific tissue involved. It is true that specific
brain lesions, such as injuries, tumors, clots, and the like, may
be accompanied by psychic symptoms, and that certain mental
diseases, such as paresis, are the sequellae of general bodily dis-
ease and show a pathological condition of the brain tissue; but
there is no way of identifying the brain of a schizophrenic of one
of the strict Kraepelin types, nor of a manic-­depressive patient,
nor of a paranoiac. These disorders we call functional, and this
distinction seems to contravene the dogma of modern material-
ism that every disorder in function has some physiological or
anatomical basis in the tissues concerned.
   This distinction between functional and organic disorders
receives a great deal of light from the consideration of the com-
puting machine. As we have already seen, it is not the empty
physical structure of the computing machine that corresponds
to the brain—­to the adult brain, at least—­but the combination
of this structure with the instructions given it at the beginning
of a chain of operations and with all the additional informa-
tion stored and gained from outside in the course of this chain.
This information is stored in some physical form—­in the form
of memory—­but part of it is in the form of circulating memories,


===== PDF PAGE 252 =====

Cybernetics and Psychopathology                                203



with a physical basis which vanishes when the machine is shut
down or the brain dies, and part in the form of long-­time memo-
ries, which are stored in a way at which we can only guess, but
probably also in a form with a physical basis which vanishes
at death. There is no way yet known for us to recognize in the
cadaver what the threshold of a given synapse has been in life;
and even if we knew this, there is no way we can trace out the
chain of neurons and synapses communicating with this, and
determine the significance of this chain for the ideational con-
tent which it records.
   There is therefore nothing surprising in considering the func-
tional mental disorders as fundamentally diseases of memory, of
the circulating information kept by the brain in the active state,
and of the long-­time permeability of synapses. Even the grosser
disorders such as paresis may produce a large part of their effects
not so much by the destruction of tissue which they involve and
the alteration of synaptic thresholds as by the secondary distur-
bances of traffic—­the overload of what remains of the nervous
system and the re-­routing of messages—­which must follow such
primary injuries.
   In a system containing a large number of neurons, circular
processes can hardly be stable for long periods of time. Either,
as in the case of memories belonging to the specious present,
they run their course, dissipate themselves, and die out, or they
comprehend more and more neurons in their system, until
they occupy an inordinate part of the neuron pool. This is what
we should expect to be the case in the malignant worry which
accompanies anxiety neuroses. In such a case, it is possible that
the patient simply does not have the room, the sufficient num-
ber of neurons, to carry out his normal processes of thought.
Under such conditions, there may be less going on in the brain


===== PDF PAGE 253 =====

204                                                       Chapter VII



to load up the neurons not yet affected, so that they are all
the more readily involved in the expanding process. Further-
more, the permanent memory becomes more and more deeply
involved, and the pathological process which occurred at first at
the level of the circulating memories may repeat itself in a more
intractable form at the level of the permanent memories. Thus
what started as a relatively trivial and accidental reversal of sta-
bility may build itself up into a process totally destructive to the
ordinary mental life.
   Pathological processes of a somewhat similar nature are not
unknown in the case of mechanical or electrical computing
machines. A tooth of a wheel may slip under just such condi-
tions that no tooth with which it engages can pull it back into its
normal relations, or a high-­speed electrical computing machine
may go into a circular process which there seems to be no way to
stop. These contingencies may depend on a highly improbable
instantaneous configuration of the system, and, when remedied,
may never—­or very rarely—­repeat themselves. However, when
they occur, they temporarily put the machine out of action.
   How do we deal with these accidents in the use of the
machine? The first thing which we try is to clear the machine of
all information, in the hope that when it starts again with differ-
ent data the difficulty may not recur. Failing this, if the difficulty
is in some point permanently or temporarily inaccessible to the
clearing mechanism, we shake the machine or, if it is electrical,
subject it to an abnormally large electrical impulse, in the hope
that we may reach the inaccessible part and throw it into a posi-
tion where the false cycle of its activities will be interrupted. If
even this fails, we may disconnect an erring part of the appara-
tus, for it is possible that what yet remains may be adequate for
our purpose.


===== PDF PAGE 254 =====

Cybernetics and Psychopathology                                 205



   Now there is no normal process except death which com-
pletely clears the brain from all past impressions; and after death,
it is impossible to set it going again. Of all normal processes,
sleep comes the nearest to a non-­
                                 pathological clearing. How
often we find that the best way to handle a complicated worry
or an intellectual muddle is to sleep over it! However, sleep does
not clear away the deeper memories, nor indeed is a sufficiently
malignant state of worry compatible with an adequate sleep. We
are thus often forced to resort to more violent types of interven-
tion in the memory cycle. The more violent of these involve a
surgical intervention into the brain, leaving behind it perma-
nent damage, mutilation, and the abridgment of the powers of
the victim, as the mammalian central nervous system seems to
possess no powers whatever of regeneration. The principal type
of surgical intervention which has been practiced is known as
prefrontal lobotomy, and consists in the removal or isolation
of a portion of the prefrontal lobe of the cortex. It has recently
been having a certain vogue, probably not unconnected with
the fact that it makes the custodial care of many patients easier.
Let me remark in passing that killing them makes their custodial
care still easier. However, prefrontal lobotomy does seem to have
a genuine effect on malignant worry, not by bringing the patient
nearer to a solution of his problems but by damaging or destroy-
ing the capacity for maintained worry, known in the terminol-
ogy of another profession as the conscience. More genei:ally, it
appears to limit all aspects of the circulating memory, the ability
to keep in mind a situation not actually presented.
   The various forms of shock treatment—­
                                        electric, insulin,
metrazol—­are less drastic methods of doing a very similar thing.
They do not destroy brain tissue or at least are not intended to
destroy it, but they do have a decidedly damaging effect on the


===== PDF PAGE 255 =====

206                                                      Chapter VII



memory. In so far as this concerns the circulating memory, and
in so far as this memory is chiefly damaged for the recent period
of mental disorder, and is probably scarcely worth preserving
anyhow, shock treatment has something definite to recommend
it as against lobotomy; but it is not always free from deleteri-
ous effects on the permanent memory and the personality. As it
stands at present, it is another violent, imperfectly understood,
imperfectly controlled method to interrupt a mental vicious cir-
cle. This does not prevent its being in many cases the best thing
we can do at present.
   Lobotomy and shock treatment are methods which by their
very nature are more suited to handle vicious circulating memo-
ries and malignant worries than the deeper-­seated permanent
memories, though it is not impossible that they may have some
effect here too. As we have said, in long-­established cases of men-
tal disorder, the permanent memory is as badly deranged as the
circulating memory. We do not seem to possess any purely phar-
maceutical or surgical weapon for intervening differentially in
the permanent memory. This is where psychoanalysis and other
similar psychotherapeutic measures come in. Whether psycho-
analysis is taken in the orthodox Freudian sense or in the modi-
fied senses of Jung and of Adler, or whether our psychotherapy
is not strictly psychoanalytic at all, our treatment is clearly based
on the concept that the stored information of the mind lies on
many levels of accessibility and is much richer and more varied
than that which is accessible by direct unaided introspection;
that it is vitally conditioned by affective experiences which we
cannot always uncover by such introspection, either because
they never were made explicit in our adult language, or because
they have been buried by a definite mechanism, affective though
generally involuntary; and that the content of these stored


===== PDF PAGE 256 =====

Cybernetics and Psychopathology                                  207



experiences, as well as their affective tone, conditions much of
our later activity in ways which may well be pathological. The
technique of the psychoanalyst consists in a series of means
to discover and interpret these hidden memories, to make the
patient accept them for what they are and by their acceptance
modify, if not their content, at least the affective tone they carry,
and thus make them less harmful. All this is perfectly consistent
with the point of view of this book. It perhaps explains, too,
why there are circumstances where a joint use of shock treat-
ment and psychotherapy is indicated, combining a physical
or pharmacological therapy for the phenomena of reverbera-
tion in the nervous system, and a psychological therapy for
the long-­time memories which, without interference, might re-­
establish from within the vicious circle broken up by the shock
treatment.
   We have already mentioned the traffic problem of the ner-
vous system. It has been commented on by many writers, such
as D’Arcy Thompson,1 that each form of organization has an
upper limit of size, beyond which it will not function. Thus the
insect organization is limited by the length of tubing over which
the spiracle method of bringing air by diffusion directly to the
breathing tissues will function; a land animal cannot be so big
that the legs or ether portions in contact with the ground will
be crushed by its weight; a tree is limited by the mechanism
for transferring water and minerals from the roots to the leaves,
and the products of photosynthesis from the leaves to the roots;
and so on. The same sort of thing is observed in engineering
constructions. Skyscrapers are limited in size by the fact that
when they exceed a certain height, the elevator space needed
for the upper stories consumes an excessive part of the cross sec-
tion of the lower floors. Beyond a certain span, the best-­possible


===== PDF PAGE 257 =====

208                                                       Chapter VII



suspension bridge which can be built out of materials with given
elastic properties will collapse under its own weight; and beyond
a certain greater span, any structure built of a given material or
materials will collapse under its own weight. Similarly, the size
of a single telephone central, built according to a constant, non-­
expanding plan, is limited, and this limitation has been very
thoroughly studied by telephone engineers.
   In a telephone system, the important limiting factor is the
fraction of the time during which a subscriber will find it impos-
sible to put a call through. A 99 per cent chance of success will
certainly be satisfactory for even the most exacting; 90 per cent
of successful calls is probably good enough to permit business
to be carried on with reasonable facility. A success of 75 per cent
is already annoying but will permit business to be carried on
after a fashion; while if half the calls end in failures, subscribers
will begin to ask to have their telephones taken out. Now, these
represent over-­all figures. If the calls go through n distinct stages
of switching, and probability of failure is independent and equal
for each stage, in order to get a probability of total success equal
to p, the probability of success at each stage must be p1/n. Thus to
obtain a 75 per cent chance of the completion of the call after
five stages, we must have about 95 per cent chance of success
per stage. To obtain a 90 per cent performance, we must have 98
per cent chance of success at each stage. To obtain a 50 per cent
performance, we must have 87 per cent chance of success at each
stage. It will be seen that the more stages which are involved, the
more rapidly the service becomes extremely bad when a critical
level of failure for the individual call is exceeded, and extremely
good when this critical level of failure is not quite reached. Thus
a switching service involving many stages and designed for a
certain level of failure shows no obvious signs of failure until the


===== PDF PAGE 258 =====

Cybernetics and Psychopathology                                 209



traffic comes up to the edge of the critical point, when it goes
completely to pieces, and we have a catastrophic traffic jam.
   Man, with the best-­
                      developed nervous system of all the
animals, with behavior that probably depends on the longest
chains of effectively operated neuronic chains, is then likely to
perform a complicated type of behavior efficiently very close to
the edge of an overload, when he will give way in a serious and
catastrophic way. This overload may take place in several ways:
either by an excess in the amount of traffic to be carried, by a
physical removal of channels for the carrying of traffic, or by the
excessive occupation of such channels by undesirable systems
of traffic, like circulating memories which have increased to the
extent of becoming pathological worries. In all these cases, a
point will come—­quite suddenly—­when the normal traffic will
not have space enough allotted to it, and we shall have a form of
mental breakdown, very possibly amounting to insanity.
   This will first affect the faculties or operations involving the
longest chains of neurons. There is appreciable evidence that
these are precisely the processes which are recognized to be the
highest in our ordinary scale of valuation. The evidence is this: a
rise in temperature within nearly physiological limits is known
to produce an increase in the ease of performance of most if not
of all neuronic processes. This is greater for the higher processes,
roughly in the order of our usual estimate of their degree of
“highness.” Now, any facilitation of a process in a single neuron-­
synapse system should be cumulative as the neuron is combined
in series with other neurons. Thus the amount of assistance a
process receives through a rise in temperature is a rough measure
of the length of the neuron chain it involves.
   We thus see that the superiority of the human brain to others
in the length of the neuron chains it employs is a reason why


===== PDF PAGE 259 =====

210                                                        Chapter VII



mental disorders are certainly most conspicuous and probably
most common in man. There is another more specific way of
considering a very similar matter. Let us first consider two brains
geometrically similar, with the weights of gray and of white mat-
ter related by the same factor of proportionality, but with dif-
ferent linear dimensions in the ratio A:B. Let the volume of the
cell bodies in the gray matter and the cross sections of the fibers
in the white matter be of the same size in both brains. Then
the number of cell bodies in the two cases bears the ratio A3:B3,
and the number of long-­distance connectors the ratio A2:B2. This
means that for the same density of activity in the cells, the den-
sity of activity in the fibers is A:B times as great in the case of the
large brain as in that of the small brain.
   If we compare the human brain with that of a lower mammal,
we shall find that it is much more convoluted. The relative thick-
ness of the gray matter is much the same, but it is spread over a
far more involved system of gyri and sulci. The effect of this is to
increase the amount of gray matter at the expense of the amount
of white matter. Within a gyrus, this decrease of the white matter
is largely a decrease in length rather than in number of fibers,
as the opposing folds of a gyrus are nearer together than they
would be on a smooth-­surfaced brain of the same size. On the
other hand, when it comes to the connectors between different
gyri, the distance they have to run is increased if anything by the
convolution of the brain. Thus the human brain would seem to
be fairly efficient in the matter of the short-­distance connectors,
but quite defective in the matter of long-­distance trunk lines.
This means that in case of a traffic jam the processes involv-
ing parts of the brain quite remote from one another should
suffer first. That is, processes involving several centers, a num-
ber of different motor processes, and a considerable number of


===== PDF PAGE 260 =====

Cybernetics and Psychopathology                                211



association areas should be among the least stable in cases of
insanity. These are precisely the processes which we should nor-
mally class as higher, and we obtain another confirmation of our
expectation, which seems to be verified by experience, that the
higher processes deteriorate first in insanity.
   There is some evidence that the long-­distance paths in the
brain have a tendency to run outside of the cerebrum altogether
and to traverse the lower centers. This is indicated by the remark-
ably small damage done by cutting some of the long-­distance
cerebral loops of white matter. It almost seems as if these super-
ficial connections were so inadequate that they furnish only a
small part of the connections really needed.
   With reference to this, the phenomena of handedness and
of hemispheric dominance are interesting. Handedness seems to
occur in the lower mammals, though it is less conspicuous than
in man, probably in part because of the lower degree of orga-
nization and skill demanded by the tasks which they perform.
Nevertheless, the choice between the right and the left side in
muscular skill does actually seem to be less than in man even in
the lower primates.
   The right-­handedness of the normal man, as is well known,
is generally associated with a left-­
                                    brainedness, and the left-­
handedness of a minority of humans with a right-­brainedness.
That is, the cerebral functions are not distributed evenly over
the two hemispheres, and one of these, the dominant hemi-
sphere, has the lion’s share of the higher functions. It is true
that many essentially bilateral functions—­those involving the
fields of vision, for example—­are represented each in its appro-
priate hemisphere, though this is not true for all bilateral func-
tions. However, most of the “higher” areas are confined to the
dominant hemisphere. For example, in the adult, the effect of an


===== PDF PAGE 261 =====

212                                                       Chapter VII



extensive injury in the secondary hemisphere is far less serious
than the effect of a similar injury in the dominant hemisphere.
At a relatively early age in his career, Pasteur suffered a cerebral
hemorrhage on his right side which left him with a moderate
degree of one-­sided paralysis, a hemiplegia. When he died, his
brain was examined, and he was found to be suffering from a
right-­sided injury, so extensive that it has been said that after his
injury “he had only half a brain.” There certainly were extensive
lesions of the parietal and temporal regions. Nevertheless, after
this injury he did some of his best work. A similar injury of the
left side in a right-­handed adult would almost certainly have
been fatal and would certainly reduce the patient into an animal
condition of mental and nervous crippledness.
   It is said that the situation is considerably better in early
infancy, and that in the first six months of life an extensive injury
to the dominant hemisphere may compel the normally second-
ary hemisphere to take its place; so that the patient appears far
more nearly normal than he would be had the injury occurred
at a later stage. This is quite in accordance with the general great
flexibility shown by the nervous system in the early weeks of
life, and the great rigidity which it rapidly develops later. It is
possible that, short of such serious injuries, handedness is rea-
sonably flexible in the very young child. However, long before
the child is of school age, the natural handedness and cerebral
dominance are established for life. It used to be thought that
left-­handedness was a serious social disadvantage. With most
tools, school desks, and sports equipment primarily made for the
right-­handed, it certainly is to some extent. In the past, more-
over, it was viewed with some of the superstitious disapproval
that has attached to so many minor variations from the human
norm, such as birthmarks or red hair. From a combination of


===== PDF PAGE 262 =====

Cybernetics and Psychopathology                                213



motives, many people have attempted and even succeeded, in
changing the external handedness of their children by educa-
tion, though of course they could not change its physiological
basis in hemispheric dominance. It was then found that in very
many cases these hemispheric changelings suffered from stut-
tering and other defects of speech, reading, and writing, to the
extent of seriously wounding their prospects in life and their
hopes for a normal career. We now see at least one possible
explanation for the phenomenon. With the education of the
secondary hand, there has been a partial education of that part
of the secondary hemisphere which deals with skilled motions,
such as writing. Since, however, these motions are carried out in
the closest possible association with reading, speech, and other
activities which are inseparably connected with the dominant
hemisphere, the neuron chains involved in processes of the sort
must cross over from hemisphere to hemisphere and back; and
in a process of any complication, they must do this again and
again. Now, the direct connectors between the hemispheres—­the
cerebral commissures—­in a brain as large as that of man are so
few in number that they are of very little use, and the interhemi-
spheric traffic must go by roundabout routes through the brain
stem, which we know very imperfectly but which are certainly
long, scanty, and subject to interruption. As a consequence, the
processes associated with speech and writing are very likely to be
involved in a traffic jam, and stuttering is the most natural thing
in the world.
   That is, the human brain is probably too large already to use
in an efficient manner all the facilities which seem to be anatom-
ically present. In a cat, the destruction of the dominant hemi-
sphere seems to produce relatively less damage than in man,
and the destruction of the secondary hemisphere probably more


===== PDF PAGE 263 =====

214                                                      Chapter VII



damage. At any rate, the apportionment of function in the two
hemispheres is more nearly equal. In man, the gain achieved by
the increase in size and complication of the brain is partly nul-
lified by the fact that less of the organ can be used effectively at
one time. It is interesting to reflect that we may be facing one of
those limitations of nature in which highly specialized organs
reach a level of declining efficiency and ultimately lead to the
extinction of the species. The human brain may be as far along
on its road to this destructive specialization as the great nose
horns of the last of the titanotheres.


===== PDF PAGE 264 =====

VIII Information, Language, and Society




The concept of an organization, the elements of which are them-
selves small organizations, is neither unfamiliar nor new. The
loose federations of ancient Greece, the Holy Roman Empire
and its similarly constituted feudal contemporaries, the Swiss
Companions of the Oath, the United Netherlands, the United
States of America, and the many united states to the south of
it, the Union of Socialist Soviet Republics, are all examples of
hierarchies of organizations on the political sphere. The Levi-
athan of Hobbes, the Man-­State made up of lesser men, is an
illustration of the same idea one stage lower in scale, while Leib-
niz’s treatment of the living organism as being really a plenum,
wherein other living organisms, such as the blood corpuscles,
have their life, is but another step in the same direction. It is,
in fact, scarcely more than a philosophical anticipation of the
cell theory, according to which most of the animals and plants
of moderate size and all of those of large dimensions are made
up of units, cells, which have many if not all the attributes of
independent living organisms. The multicellular organisms
may themselves be the building bricks of organisms of a higher
stage, such as the Portuguese man-­of-­war, which is a complex
structure of differentiated coelenterate polyps, where the several


===== PDF PAGE 265 =====

216                                                   Chapter VIII



individuals are modified in different ways to serve the nutrition,
the support, the locomotion, the excretion, the reproduction,
and the support of the colony as a whole.
  Strictly speaking, such a physically conjoint colony as that
poses no question of organization which is philosophically
deeper than those which arise at a lower level of individuality.
It is very different with man and the other social animals—­with
the herds of baboons or cattle, the beaver colonies, the hives of
bees, the nests of wasps or ants. The degree of integration of the
life of the community may very well approach the level shown
in the conduct of a single individual, yet the individual will
probably have a fixed nervous system, with permanent topo-
graphic relations between the elements and permanent connec-
tions, while the community consists of individuals with shifting
relations in space and time and no permanent, unbreakable
physical connections. All the nervous tissue of the beehive is the
nervous tissue of some single bee. How then does the beehive
act in unison, and at that in a very variable, adapted, organized
unison? Obviously, the secret is in the intercommunication of
its members.
  This intercommunication can vary greatly in complexity and
content. With man, it embraces the whole intricacy of language
and literature, and very much besides. With the ants, it probably
does not cover much more than a few smells. It is very improba-
ble that an ant can distinguish one ant from another. It certainly
can distinguish an ant from its own nest from an ant from a
foreign nest, and may cooperate with the one, destroy the other.
Within a few outside reactions of this kind, the ant seems to
have a mind almost as patterned, chitin-­bound, as its body. It
is what we might expect a priori from an animal whose growing
phase and, to a large extent, whose learning phase are rigidly


===== PDF PAGE 266 =====

Information, Language, and Society                             217



separated from the phase of mature activity. The only means
of communication we can trace in them are as general and dif-
fuse as the hormonal system of communication within the body.
Indeed, smell, one of the chemical senses, general and undi-
rectional as it is, is not unlike the hormonal influences within
the body.
   Let it be remarked parenthetically that musk, civet, castoreum,
and the like sexually attractive substances in the mammals may
be regarded as communal, exterior hormones, indispensable,
especially in solitary animals, for the bringing the sexes together
at the proper time, and serve for the continuation of the race. By
this I do not mean to assert that the inner action of these sub-
stances, once they reach the organ of smell, is hormonal rather
than nervous. It is hard to see how it can be purely hormonal in
quantities as small as those which are readily perceivable; on the
other hand, we know too little of the action of the hormones to
deny the possibility of the hormonal action of vanishingly small
quantities of such substances. Moreover, the long, twisted rings
of carbon atoms found in muskone and civetone do not need
too much rearrangement to form the linked ring structure char-
acteristic of the sex hormones, some of the vitamins, and some
of the carcinogens. I do not care to pronounce an opinion on
this matter; I leave it as an interesting speculation.
   The odors perceived by the ant seem to lead to a highly stan-
dardized course of conduct; but the value of a simple stimulus,
such as an odor, for conveying information depends not only
on the information conveyed by the stimulus itself but on the
whole nervous constitution of the sender and the receiver of the
stimulus as well. Suppose I find myself in the woods with an
intelligent savage who cannot speak my language and whose
language I cannot speak. Even without any code of sign language


===== PDF PAGE 267 =====

218                                                      Chapter VIII



common to the two of us, I can learn a great deal from him. All
I need to do is to be alert to those moments when he shows the
signs of emotion or interest. I then cast my eyes around, perhaps
paying special attention to the direction of his glance, and fix
in my memory what I see or hear. It will not be long before I
discover the things which seem important to him, not because
he has communicated them to me by language, but because I
myself have observed them. In other words, a signal without an
intrinsic content may acquire meaning in his mind by what he
observes at the time, and may acquire meaning in my mind by
what I observe at the time. The ability that he has to pick out the
moments of my special, active attention is in itself a language as
varied in possibilities as the range of impressions that the two
of us are able to encompass. Thus social animals may have an
active, intelligent, flexible means of communication long before
the development of language.
   Whatever means of communication the race may have, it is
possible to define and to measure the amount of information
available to the race and to distinguish it from the amount of
information available to the individual. Certainly no informa-
tion available to the individual is also available to the race unless
it modifies the behavior of one individual to another, nor is even
that behavior of racial significance unless it is distinguishable by
other individuals from other forms of behavior. Thus the ques-
tion as to whether a certain piece of information is racial or of
purely private availability depends on whether it results in the
individual assuming a form of activity which can be recognized
as a distinct form of activity by other members of the race, in the
sense that it will in turn affect their activity, and so on.
   I have spoken of the race. This is really too broad a term for
the scope of most communal information. Properly speaking,


===== PDF PAGE 268 =====

Information, Language, and Society                              219



the community extends only so far as there extends an effec-
tual transmission of information. It is possible to give a sort of
measure to this by comparing the number of decisions enter-
ing a group from outside with the number of decisions made
in the group. We can thus measure the autonomy of the group.
A measure of the effective size of a group is given by the size
which it must have to have achieved a certain stated degree of
autonomy.
   A group may have more group information or less group
information than its members. A group of non-­social animals,
temporarily assembled, contains very little group information,
even though its members may possess much information as
individuals. This is because very little that one member does is
noticed by the others and is acted on by them in a way that goes
further in the group. On the other hand, the human organism
contains vastly more information, in all probability, than does
any one of its cells. There is thus no necessary relation in either
direction between the amount of racial or tribal or community
information and the amount of information available to the
individual.
   As in the case of the individual, not all the information which
is available to the race at one time is accessible without special
effort. There is a well-­known tendency of libraries to become
clogged by their own volume; of the sciences to develop such a
degree of specialization that the expert is often illiterate outside
his own minute specialty. Dr. Vannevar Bush has suggested the
use of mechanical aids for the searching through vast bodies of
material. These probably have their uses, but they are limited
by the impossibility of classifying a book under an unfamiliar
heading unless some particular person has already recognized
the relevance of that heading for that particular book. In the


===== PDF PAGE 269 =====

220                                                     Chapter VIII



case where two subjects have the same techniques and intel-
lectual content but belong to widely separated fields, this still
requires some individual with an almost Leibnizian catholicity
of interest.
   In connection with the effective amount of communal infor-
mation, one of the most surprising facts about the body politic
is its extreme lack of efficient homeostatic processes. There is a
belief, current in many countries, which has been elevated to
the rank of an official article of faith in the United States, that
free competition is itself a homeostatic process: that in a free
market the individual selfishness of the bargainers, each seeking
to sell as high and buy as low as possible, will result in the end
in a stable dynamics of prices, and with redound to the greatest
common good. This is associated with the very comforting view
that the individual entrepreneur, in seeking to forward his own
interest, is in some manner a public benefactor and has thus
earned the great rewards with which society has showered him.
Unfortunately, the evidence, such as it is, is against this simple-­
minded theory. The market is a game, which has indeed received
a simulacrum in the family game of Monopoly. It is thus strictly
subject to the general theory of games, developed by von Neu-
mann and Morgenstern. This theory is based on the assumption
that each player, at every stage, in view of the information then
available to him, plays in accordance with a completely intel-
ligent policy, which will in the end assure him of the greatest
possible expectation of reward. It is thus the market game as
played between perfectly intelligent, perfectly ruthless opera-
tors. Even in the case of two players, the theory is complicated,
although it often leads to the choice of a definite line of play. In
many cases, however, where there are three players, and in the
overwhelming majority of cases, when the number of players is


===== PDF PAGE 270 =====

Information, Language, and Society                                221



large, the result is one of extreme indeterminacy and instability.
The individual players are compelled by their own cupidity to
form coalitions; but these coalitions do not generally establish
themselves in any single, determinate way, and usually termi-
nate in a welter of betrayal, turncoatism, and deception, which
is only too true a picture of the higher business life, or the closely
related lives of politics, diplomacy, and war. In the long run,
even the most brilliant and unprincipled huckster must expect
ruin; but let the hucksters become tired of this and agree to live
in peace with one another, and the great rewards are reserved
for the one who watches for an opportune time to break his
agreement and betray his companions. There is no homeostasis
whatever. We are involved in the business cycles of boom and
failure, in the successions of dictatorship and revolution, in the
wars which everyone loses, which are so real a feature of modern
times.
   Naturally, von Neumann’s picture of the player as a com-
pletely intelligent, completely ruthless person is an abstraction
and a perversion of the facts. It is rare to find a large number
of thoroughly clever and unprincipled persons playing a game
together. Where the knaves assemble, there will always be fools;
and where the fools are present in sufficient numbers, they offer
a more profitable object of exploitation for the knaves. The psy-
chology of the fool has become a subject well worth the seri-
ous attention of the knaves. Instead of looking out for his own
ultimate interest, after the fashion of von Neumann’s gamesters,
the fool operates in a manner which, by and large, is as predict-
able as the struggles of a rat in a maze. This policy of lies—­or
rather, of statements irrelevant to the truth—­
                                              will make him
buy a particular brand of cigarettes; that policy will, or so the
party hopes, induce him to vote for a particular candidate—­any


===== PDF PAGE 271 =====

222                                                      Chapter VIII



candidate—­or to join in a political witch hunt. A certain precise
mixture of religion, pornography, and pseudoscience will sell an
illustrated newspaper. A certain blend of wheedling, bribery, and
intimidation will induce a young scientist to work on guided
missiles or the atomic bomb. To determine these, we have our
machinery of radio fan ratings, straw votes, opinion samplings,
and other psychological investigations, with the common man
as their object; and there are always the statisticians, sociolo-
gists, and economists available to sell their services to these
undertakings.
   Luckily for us, these merchants of lies, these exploiters of gull-
ibility, have not yet arrived at such a pitch of perfection as to
have things all their own way. This is because no man is either
all fool or all knave. The average man is quite reasonably intel-
ligent concerning subjects which come to his direct attention
and quite reasonably altruistic in matters of public benefit or
private suffering which are brought before his own eyes. In a
small country community which has been running long enough
to have developed somewhat uniform levels of intelligence and
behavior, there is a very respectable standard of care for the
unfortunate, of administration of roads and other public facil-
ities, of tolerance for those who have offended once or twice
against society. After all, these people are there, and the rest of
the community must continue to live with them. On the other
hand, in such a community, it does not do for a man to have the
habit of overreaching his neighbors. There are ways of making
him feel the weight of public opinion. After a while, he will find
it so ubiquitous, so unavoidable, so restricting and oppressing
that he will have to leave the community in self-­defense.
   Thus small, closely knit communities have a very consider-
able measure of homeostasis; and this, whether they are highly


===== PDF PAGE 272 =====

Information, Language, and Society                             223



literate communities in a civilized country or villages of primi-
tive savages. Strange and even repugnant as the customs of
many barbarians may seem to us, they generally have a very
definite homeostatic value, which it is part of the function of
anthropologists to interpret. It is only in the large community,
where the Lords of Things as They Are protect themselves from
hunger by wealth, from public opinion by privacy and anonym-
ity, from private criticism by the laws of libel and the possession
of the means of communication, that ruthlessness can reach its
most sublime levels. Of all of these anti-­homeostatic factors in
society, the control of the means of communication is the most
effective and most important.
   One of the lessons of the present book is that any organism
is held together in this action by the possession of means for
the acquisition, use, retention, and transmission of informa-
tion. In a society too large for the direct contact of its mem-
bers, these means are the press, both as it concerns books and
as it concerns newspapers, the radio, the telephone system, the
telegraph, the posts, the theater, the movies, the schools, and
the church. Besides their intrinsic importance as means of com-
munication, each of these serves other, secondary functions.
The newspaper is a vehicle for advertisement and an instrument
for the monetary gain of its proprietor, as are also the movies
and the radio. The school and the church are not merely refuges
for the scholar and the saint: they are also the home of the Great
Educator and the Bishop. The book that does not earn money
for its publisher probably does not get printed and certainly does
not get reprinted.
   In a society like ours, avowedly based on buying and sell-
ing, in which all natural and human resources are regarded as
the absolute property of the first business man enterprising


===== PDF PAGE 273 =====

224                                                     Chapter VIII



enough to exploit them, these secondary aspects of the means
of communication tend to encroach further and further on the
primary ones. This is aided by the very elaboration and the con-
sequent expense of the means themselves. The country paper
may continue to use its own reporters to canvass the villages
around for gossip, but it buys its national news, its syndicated
features, its political opinions, as stereotyped “boiler plate.” The
radio depends on its advertisers for income, and, as everywhere,
the man who pays the piper calls the tune. The great news ser-
vices cost too much to be available to the publisher of moderate
means. The book publishers concentrate on books that are likely
to be acceptable to some book club which buys out the whole
of an enormous edition. The college president and the Bishop,
even if they have no personal ambitions for power, have expen-
sive institutions to run and can only seek their money where the
money is.
   Thus on all sides we have a triple constriction of the means of
communication: the elimination of the less profitable means in
favor of the more profitable; the fact that these means are in the
hands of the very limited class of wealthy men, and thus natu-
rally express the opinions of that class; and the further fact that,
as one of the chief avenues to political and personal power, they
attract above all those ambitious for such power. That system
which more than all others should contribute to social homeo-
stasis is thrown directly into the hands of those most concerned
in the game of power and money, which we have already seen
to be one of the chief anti-­homeostatic elements in the commu-
nity. It is no wonder then that the larger communities, subject to
this disruptive influence, contain far less communally available
information than the smaller communities, to say nothing of
the human elements of which all communities are built up. Like


===== PDF PAGE 274 =====

Information, Language, and Society                              225



the wolf pack, although let us hope to a lesser extent, the State is
stupider than most of its components.
   This runs counter to a tendency much voiced among business
executives, heads of great laboratories, and the like, to assume
that because the community is larger than the individual it is
also more intelligent. Some of this opinion is due to no more
than a childish delight in the large and the lavish. Some of it
is due to a sense of the possibilities of a large organization for
good. Not a little of it, however, is nothing more than an eye for
the main chance and a lusting after the fleshpots of Egypt.
   There is another group of those who see nothing good in the
anarchy of modern society, and in whom an optimistic feeling
that there must be some way out has led to an overvaluation of
the possible homeostatic elements in the community. Much as
we may sympathize with these individuals and appreciate the
emotional dilemma in which they find themselves, we cannot
attribute too much value to this type of wishful thinking. It is
the mode of thought of the mice when faced with the problem
of belling the cat. Undoubtedly it would be very pleasant for
us mice if the predatory cats of this world were to be belled,
but—­who is going to do it? Who is to assure us that ruthless
power will not find its way back into the hands of those most
avid for it?
   I mention this matter because of the considerable, and I think
false, hopes which some of my friends have built for the social
efficacy of whatever new ways of thinking this book may con-
tain. They are certain that our control over our material environ-
ment has far outgrown our control over our social environment
and our understanding thereof. Therefore, they consider that
the main task of the immediate future is to extend to the fields
of anthropology, of sociology, of economics, the methods of the


===== PDF PAGE 275 =====

226                                                     Chapter VIII



natural sciences, in the hope of achieving a like measure of suc-
cess in the social fields. From believing this necessary, they come
to believe it possible. In this, I maintain, they show an excessive
optimism, and a misunderstanding of the nature of all scientific
achievement.
   All the great successes in precise science have been made in
fields where there is a certain high degree of isolation of the
phenomenon from the observer. We have seen in the case of
astronomy that this may result from the enormous scale of cer-
tain phenomena with respect to man, so that man’s mightiest
efforts, not to speak of his mere glance, cannot make the slight-
est visible impression on the celestial world. In modern atomic
physics, on the other hand, the science of the unspeakably min-
ute, it is true that anything we do will have an influence on
many individual particles which is great from the point of view
of that particle. However, we do not live on the scale of the par-
ticles concerned, either in space or in time; and the events that
might be of the greatest significance from the point of view of
an observer conforming to their scale of existence appear to us—­
with some exceptions, it is true, as in the Wilson cloud-­chamber
experiments—­only as average mass effects in which enormous
populations of particles cooperate. As far as these effects are con-
cerned, the intervals of time concerned are large from the point
of view of the individual particle and its motion, and our statisti-
cal theories have an admirably adequate basis. In short, we are
too small to influence the stars in their courses, and too large to
care about anything but the mass effects of molecules, atoms,
and electrons. In both cases, we achieve a sufficiently loose cou-
pling with the phenomena we are studying to give a massive
total account of this coupling, although the coupling may not
be loose enough for us to be able to ignore it altogether.


===== PDF PAGE 276 =====

Information, Language, and Society                             227



   It is in the social sciences that the coupling between the
observed phenomenon and the observer is hardest to minimize.
On the one hand, the observer is able to exert a considerable
influence on the phenomena that come to his attention. With
all respect to the intelligence, skill, and honesty of purpose of
my anthropologist friends, I cannot think that any community
which they have investigated will ever be quite the same after-
ward. Many a missionary has fixed his own misunderstandings
of a primitive language as law eternal in the process of reducing
it to writing. There is much in the social habits of a people which
is dispersed and distorted by the mere act of making inquiries
about it. In another sense from that in which it is usually stated,
traduttore traditore.
   On the other hand, the social scientist has not the advantage
of looking down on his subjects from the cold heights of eter-
nity and ubiquity. It may be that there is a mass sociology of the
human animalcule, observed like the populations of Drosophila
in a bottle, but this is not a sociology in which we, who are
human animalcules ourselves, are particularly interested. We are
not much concerned about human rises and falls, pleasures and
agonies, sub specie aeternitatis. Your anthropologist reports the
customs associated with the life, education, career, and death of
people whose life scale is much the same as his own. Your econo-
mist is most interested in predicting such business cycles as run
their course in less than a generation or, at least, have repercus-
sions which affect a man differentially at different stages of his
career. Few philosophers of politics nowadays care to confine
their investigations to the world of Ideas of Plato.
   In other words, in the social sciences we have to deal with
short statistical runs, nor can we be sure that a considerable part
of what we observe is not an artifact of our own creation. An


===== PDF PAGE 277 =====

228                                                      Chapter VIII



investigation of the stock market is likely to upset the stock mar-
ket. We are too much in tune with the objects of our investiga-
tion to be good probes. In short, whether our investigations in
the social sciences be statistical or dynamic—­and they should
participate in the nature of both—­they can never be good to
more than a very few decimal places, and, in short, can never
furnish us with a quantity of verifiable, significant informa-
tion which begins to compare with that which we have learned
to expect in the natural sciences. We cannot afford to neglect
them; neither should we build exaggerated expectations of their
possibilities. There is much which we must leave, whether we
like it or not, to the un-­“scientific,” narrative method of the pro-
fessional historian.


Note


There is one question which properly belongs to this chapter,
though it in no sense represents a culmination of its argument.
It is the question whether it is possible to construct a chess-­
playing machine, and whether this sort of ability represents an
essential difference between the potentialities of the machine
and the mind. Note that we need not raise the question as to
whether it is possible to construct a machine which will play
an optimum game in the sense of von Neumann. Not even the
best human brain approximates to this. At the other end, it is
unquestionably possible to construct a machine that will play
chess in the sense of following the rules of the game, irrespective
of the merit of the play. This is essentially no more difficult than
the construction of a system of interlocking signals for a railway
signal tower. The real problem is intermediate: to construct a
machine which shall offer interesting opposition to a player at


===== PDF PAGE 278 =====

Information, Language, and Society                            229



some one of the many levels at which human chess players find
themselves.
   I think it is possible to construct a relatively crude but not
altogether trivial apparatus for this purpose. The machine must
actually play—­at a high speed if possible—­all its own admissible
moves and all the opponent’s admissible ripostes for two or three
moves ahead. To each sequence of moves it should assign a cer-
tain conventional valuation. Here, to checkmate the opponent
receives the highest valuation at each stage, to be checkmated,
the lowest; while losing pieces, taking opponent’s pieces, check-
ing, and other recognizable situations should receive valuations
not too remote from those which good players would assign
them. The first of an entire sequence of moves should receive
a valuation much as von Neumann’s theory would assign it. At
the stage at which the machine is to play once and the opponent
once, the valuation of a play by the machine is the minimum
valuation of the situation after the opponent has made all pos-
sible plays. At the stage where the machine is to play twice and
the opponent twice, the valuation of a play by the machine is
the minimum with respect to the opponent’s first play of the
maximum valuation of the plays by the machine at the stage
when there is only one play of the opponent and one by the
machine to follow. This process can be extended to the case when
each player makes three plays, and so on. Then the machine
chooses any one of the plays giving the maximum valuation
for the stage n plays ahead, where n has some value on which
the designer of the machine has decided. This it makes as its
definitive play.
   Such a machine would not only play legal chess, but a chess
not so manifestly bad as to be ridiculous. At any stage, if there
were a mate possible in two or three moves, the machine would


===== PDF PAGE 279 =====

230                                                   Chapter VIII



make it; and if it were possible to avoid a mate by the enemy in
two or three moves, the machine would avoid it. It would prob-
ably win over a stupid or careless chess player, and would almost
certainly lose to a careful player of any considerable degree of
proficiency. In other words, it might very well be as good a
player as the vast majority of the human race. This does not
mean that it would reach the degree of proficiency of Maelzel’s
fraudulent machine, but, for all that, it may attain a pretty fair
level of accomplishment.


===== PDF PAGE 280 =====

Part II Supplementary Chapters (1961)


===== PDF PAGE 281 =====



===== PDF PAGE 282 =====

IX On Learning and Self-­Reproducing Machines




Two of the phenomena which we consider to be characteristic
of living systems are the power to learn and the power to repro-
duce themselves. These properties, different as they appear, are
intimately related to one another. An animal that learns is one
which is capable of being transformed by its past environment
into a different being and is therefore adjustable to its envi-
ronment within its individual lifetime. An animal that multi-
plies is able to create other animals in its own likeness at least
approximately, although not so completely in its own likeness
that they cannot vary in the course of time. If this variation
is itself inheritable, we have the raw material on which natu-
ral selection can work. If the hereditary invariability concerns
manners of behavior, then among the varied patterns of behav-
ior which are propagated some will be found advantageous to
the continuing existence of the race and will establish them-
selves, while others which are detrimental to this continuing
existence will be eliminated. The result is a certain sort of racial
or phylogenetic learning, as contrasted with the ontogenetic
learning of the individual. Both ontogenetic and phylogenetic
learning are modes by which the animal can adjust itself to its
environment.


===== PDF PAGE 283 =====

234                                                     Chapter IX



   Both ontogenetic and phylogenetic learning, and certainly
the latter, extend themselves not only to all animals but to
plants and, indeed, to all organisms which in any sense may be
considered to be living. However, the degree to which these two
forms of learning are found to be important in different sorts of
living beings varies widely. In man, and to a lesser extent in the
other mammals, ontogenetic learning and individual adaptabil-
ity are raised to the highest point. Indeed, it may be said that a
large part of the phylogenetic learning of man has been devoted
to establishing the possibility of good ontogenetic learning.
   It has been pointed out by Julian Huxley in his fundamen-
tal paper on the mind of birds1 that birds have a small capacity
for ontogenetic learning. Something similar is true in the case
of insects, and in both instances it may be associated with the
terrific demands made on the individual by flight and the con-
sequential pre-­emption of the capabilities of the nervous sys-
tem which might otherwise be applied to ontogenetic learning.
Complicated as the behavior patterns of birds are—­in flying, in
courtship, in the care of the young, and in nest building—­they
are carried out correctly the very first time without the need of
any large amount of instruction from the mother.
   It is altogether appropriate to devote a chapter of this book
to these two related subjects. Can man-­made machines learn
and can they reproduce themselves? We shall try to show in
this chapter that in fact they can learn and can reproduce them-
selves, and we shall give an account of the technique needed for
both these activities.
   The simpler of these two processes is that of learning, and it
is there that the technical development has gone furthest. I shall
talk here particularly of the learning of game-­playing machines


===== PDF PAGE 284 =====

On Learning and Self-­Reproducing Machines                      235



which enables them to improve the strategy and tactics of their
performance by experience.
   There is an established theory of the playing of games—­the
von Neumann theory.2 It concerns a policy which is best con-
sidered by working from the end of the game rather than from
the beginning. In the last move of the game, a player strives
to make a winning move if possible, and if not, then at least a
drawing move. His opponent, at the previous stage, strives to
make a move which will prevent the other player from making
a winning or a drawing move. If he can himself make a winning
move at that stage, he will do so, and this will not be the next
to the last but the last stage of the game. The other player at
the move before this will try to act in such a way that the very
best resources of his opponent will not prevent him from ending
with a winning move, and so on backward.
   There are games such as ticktacktoe where the entire strategy
is known, and it is possible to start this policy from the very
beginning. When this is feasible, it is manifestly the best way
of playing the game. However, in many games like chess and
checkers our knowledge is not sufficient to permit a complete
strategy of this sort, and then we can only approximate to it. The
von Neumann type of approximate theory tends to lead a player
to act with the utmost caution, assuming that his opponent is
the perfectly wise sort of a master.
   This attitude, however, is not always justified. In war, which
is a sort of game, this will in general lead to an indecisive action
which will often be not much better than a defeat. Let me give
two historical examples. When Napoleon fought the Austrians
in Italy, it was part of his effectiveness that he knew the Austrian
mode of military thought to be hidebound and traditional, so
that he was quite justified in assuming that they were incapable


===== PDF PAGE 285 =====

236                                                      Chapter IX



of taking advantage of the new decision-­compelling methods
of war which had been developed by the soldiers of the French
Revolution. When Nelson fought the combined fleets of conti-
nental Europe, he had the advantage of fighting with a naval
machine which had kept the seas for years and which had devel-
oped methods of thought of which, as he was well aware, his
enemies were incapable. If he had not made the fullest possible
use of this advantage, instead of acting as cautiously as he would
have had to act under the supposition that he was facing an
enemy of equal naval experience, he might have won in the
long run but could not have won so quickly and decisively as to
establish the tight naval blockade which was the ultimate down-
fall of Napoleon. Thus, in both cases, the guiding factor was
the known record of the commander and of his opponents, as
exhibited statistically in the past of their actions, rather than an
attempt to play the perfect game against the perfect opponent.
Any direct use of the von Neumann method of game theory in
these cases would have proved futile.
   In a similar way, books on chess theory are not written from
the von Neumann point of view. They are compendia of princi-
ples drawn from the practical experience of chess players playing
against other chess players of high quality and wide knowledge;
and they establish certain values or weightings to be given to
the loss of each piece, to mobility, to command, to develop-
ment, and to other factors which may vary with the stage of
the game.
   It is not very difficult to make machines which will play chess
of a sort. The mere obedience to the laws of the game, so that
only legal moves are made, is easily within the power of quite
simple computing machines. Indeed, it is not hard to adapt an
ordinary digital machine to these purposes.


===== PDF PAGE 286 =====

On Learning and Self-­Reproducing Machines                     237



   Now comes the question of policy within the rules of the
game. Every evaluation of pieces, command, mobility, and so
forth, is intrinsically capable of being reduced to numerical
terms; and when this is done, the maxims of a chess book may
be used for the determination of the best moves of each stage.
Such machines have been made; and they will play a very fair
amateur chess, although at present not a game of master caliber.
   Imagine yourself in the position of playing chess against such
a machine. To make the situation fair, let us suppose you are
playing correspondence chess without the knowledge that it is
such a machine you are playing and without the prejudices that
this knowledge may excite. Naturally, as always is the case with
chess, you will come to a judgment of your opponent’s chess
personality. You will find that when the same situation comes
up twice on the chessboard, your opponent’s reaction will be
the same each time, and you will find that he has a very rigid
personality. If any trick of yours will work, then it will always
work under the same conditions. It is thus not too hard for an
expert to get a line on his machine opponent and to defeat him
every time.
   However, there are machines that cannot be defeated so trivi-
ally. Let us suppose that every few games the machine takes time
off and uses its facilities for another purpose. This time, it does
not play against an opponent, but examines all the previous
games which it has recorded on its memory to determine what
weighting of the different evaluations of the worth of pieces,
command, mobility, and the like, will conduce most to winning.
In this way, it learns not only from its own failures but its oppo-
nent’s successes. It now replaces its earlier valuations by the new
ones and goes on playing as a new and better machine. Such a
machine would no longer have as rigid a personality, and the


===== PDF PAGE 287 =====

238                                                     Chapter IX



tricks which were once successful against it will ultimately fail.
More than that, it may absorb in the course of time something
of the policy of its opponents.
  All this is very difficult to do in chess, and as a matter of
fact the full development of this technique, so as to give rise
to a machine that can play master chess, has not been accom-
plished. Checkers offers an easier problem. The homogeneity of
the values of the pieces greatly reduces the number of combi-
nations to be considered. Moreover, partly as a consequence of
this homogeneity, the checker game is much less divided into
distinct stages than the chess game. Even in checkers, the main
problem of the end game is no longer to take pieces but to estab-
lish contact with the enemy so that one is in a position to take
pieces. Similarly, the valuation of moves in the chess game must
be made independently for the different stages. Not only is the
end game different from the middle game in the considerations
which are paramount, but the openings are much more devoted
to getting the pieces into a position of free mobility for attack
and defense than is the middle game. The result is that we can-
not be even approximately content with a uniform evaluation of
the various weighting factors for the game as a whole, but must
divide the learning process into a number of separate stages.
Only then can we hope to construct a learning machine which
can play master chess.
  The idea of a first-­order programming, which may be linear
in certain cases, combined with a second-­order programming,
which uses a much more extensive segment of the past for the
determination of the policy to be carried out in the first-­order
programming, has been mentioned earlier in this book in con-
nection with the problem of prediction. The predictor uses
the immediate past of the flight of the airplane as a tool for the


===== PDF PAGE 288 =====

On Learning and Self-­Reproducing Machines                        239



prediction of the future by means of a linear operation; but the
determination of the correct linear operation is a statistical prob-
lem in which the long past of the flight and the past of many
similar flights are used to give the basis of the statistics.
   The statistical studies necessary to use a long past for a deter-
mination of the policy to be adopted in view of the short past are
highly non-­linear. As a matter of fact, in the use of the Wiener-­
Hopf equation for prediction,3 the determination of the coef-
ficients of this equation is carried out in a non-­linear manner.
In general, a learning machine operates by non-­linear feedback.
The checker-­playing machine described by Samuel4 and Wata-
nabe5 can learn to defeat the man that programmed it in a fairly
consistent way on the basis of from 10 to 20 operating hours of
programming.
   Watanabe’s philosophical ideas on the use of programming
machines are very exciting. On the one hand, he is treating a
method of proving an elementary geometrical theorem which
shall conform in an optimal way according to certain criteria
of elegance and simplicity, as a learning game to be played not
against an individual opponent but against what we may call
“Colonel Bogey.” A similar game which Watanabe is studying is
played in logical induction, when we wish to build up a theory
which is optimal in a similar quasi-­aesthetic way, on the basis
of an evaluation of economy, directness, and the like, by the
determination of the evaluation of a finite number of param-
eters which are left free. This, it is true, is only a limited logical
induction, but it is well worth studying.
   Many forms of the activity of struggle, which we do not ordi-
narily consider as games, have a great deal of light thrown on
them by the theory of game-­playing machines. One interesting
example is the fight between a mongoose and a snake. As Kipling


===== PDF PAGE 289 =====

240                                                     Chapter IX



points out in “Rikki-­Tikki-­Tavi,” the mongoose is not immune to
the poison of the cobra, although it is to some extent protected
by its coat of stiff hairs which makes it difficult for the snake
to bite home. As Kipling states, the fight is a dance with death,
a struggle of muscular skill and agility. There is no reason to
suppose that the individual motions of the mongoose are faster
or more accurate than those of the cobra. Yet the mongoose
almost invariably kills the cobra and comes out of the contest
unscathed. How is it able to do this?
   I am here giving an account which appears valid to me, from
having seen such a fight, as well as motion pictures of other
such fights. I do not guarantee the correctness of my observa-
tions as interpretations. The mongoose begins with a feint,
which provokes the snake to strike. The mongoose dodges and
makes another such feint, so that we have a rhythmical pattern
of activity on the part of the two animals. However, this dance
is not static but develops progressively. As it goes on, the feints
of the mongoose come earlier and earlier in phase with respect
to the darts of the cobra, until finally the mongoose attacks
when the cobra is extended and not in a position to move rap-
idly. This time the mongoose’s attack is not a feint but a deadly
accurate bite through the cobra’s brain.
   In other words, the snake’s pattern of action is confined to
single darts, each one for itself, while the pattern of the mon-
goose’s action involves an appreciable, if not very long, segment
of the whole past of the fight. To this extent the mongoose acts
like a learning machine, and the real deadliness of its attack is
dependent on a much more highly organized nervous system.
   As a Walt Disney movie of several years ago showed, some-
thing very similar happens when one of our western birds, the
road runner, attacks a rattlesnake. While the bird fights with


===== PDF PAGE 290 =====

On Learning and Self-­Reproducing Machines                     241



beak and claws, and a mongoose with its teeth, the pattern of
activity is very similar. A bullfight is a very fine example of the
same thing. For it must be remembered that the bullfight is not a
sport but a dance with death, to exhibit the beauty and the inter-
laced coordinating actions of the bull and the man. Fairness to
the bull has no part in it, and we can leave out from our point of
view the preliminary goading and weakening of the bull, which
have the purpose of bringing the contest to a level where the
interaction of the patterns of the two participants is most highly
developed. The skilled bullfighter has a large repertory of pos-
sible actions, such as the flaunting of the cape, various dodges
and pirouettes, and the like, which are intended to bring the
bull into a position in which it has completed its rush and is
extended at the precise moment that the bullfighter is ready to
plunge the estoque into the bull’s heart.
   What I have said concerning the fight between the mongoose
and the cobra, or the toreador and the bull, will also apply to
physical contests between man and man. Consider a duel with
the small-­sword. It consists of a sequence of feints, parries, and
thrusts, with the intention on the part of each participant to
bring his opponent’s sword out of line to such an extent that
he can thrust home without laying himself open to a double
encounter. Again, in a championship game of tennis, it is not
enough to serve or return the ball perfectly as far as each indi-
vidual stroke is considered; the strategy is rather to force the
opponent into a series of returns which put him progressively
in a worse position until there is no way in which he can return
the ball safely.
   These physical contests and the sort of games which we have
supposed the game-­playing machine to play both have the same
element of learning in terms of experience of the opponent’s


===== PDF PAGE 291 =====

242                                                     Chapter IX



habits as well as one’s own. What is true of games of physical
encounter is also true of contests in which the intellectual ele-
ment is stronger, such as war and the games which simulate war,
by which our staff officers win the elements of their military
experience. This is true for classical war both on land and at sea,
and is equally true with the new and as yet untried war with
atomic weapons. Some degree of mechanization, parallel to the
mechanization of checkers by learning machines, is possible in
all these.
   There is nothing more dangerous to contemplate than World
War III. It is worth considering whether part of the danger may
not be intrinsic in the unguarded use of learning machines.
Again and again I have heard the statement that learning
machines cannot subject us to any new dangers, because we
can turn them off when we feel like it. But can we? To turn a
machine off effectively, we must be in possession of information
as to whether the danger point has come. The mere fact that we
have made the machine does not guarantee that we shall have
the proper information to do this. This is already implicit in the
statement that the checker-­playing machine can defeat the man
who has programmed it, and this after a very limited time of
working in. Moreover, the very speed of operation of modern
digital machines stands in the way of our ability to perceive and
think through the indications of danger.
   The idea of non-­human devices of great power and great abil-
ity to carry through a policy, and of their dangers, is nothing
new. All that is new is that now we possess effective devices of
this kind. In the past, similar possibilities were postulated for
the techniques of magic, which forms the theme for so many
legends and folk tales. These tales have thoroughly explored the
moral situation of the magician. I have already discussed some


===== PDF PAGE 292 =====

On Learning and Self-­Reproducing Machines                     243



aspects of the legendary ethics of magic in an earlier book enti-
tled The Human Use of Human Beings.6 I here repeat some of the
material which I have discussed there, in order to bring it out
more precisely in its new context of learning machines.
   One of the best-­known tales of magic is Goethe’s “The Sor-
cerer’s Apprentice.” In this, the sorcerer leaves his apprentice
and factotum alone with the chore of fetching water. As the boy
is lazy and ingenious, he passes the work over to a broom, to
which he has uttered the words of magic which he has heard
from his master. The broom obligingly does the work for him
and will not stop. The boy is on the verge of being drowned out.
He finds that he has not learned, or has forgotten, the second
incantation which is to stop the broom. In desperation, he takes
the broomstick, breaks it over his knee, and finds to his con-
sternation that each half of the broom continues to fetch water.
Luckily, before he is completely destroyed, the master returns,
says the Words of Power to stop the broom, and administers a
good scolding to the apprentice.
   Another story is the Arabian Nights tale of the fisherman and
the genie. The fisherman has dredged up in his net a jug closed
with the seal of Solomon. It is one of the vessels in which Solo-
mon has imprisoned the rebellious genie. The genie emerges in a
cloud of smoke, and the gigantic figure tells the fisherman that,
whereas in his first years of imprisonment he had resolved to
reward his rescuer with power and fortune, he has now decided
to slay him out of hand. Luckily for himself, the fisherman finds
a way to talk the genie back into the bottle, upon which he casts
the jar to the bottom of the ocean.
   More terrible than either of these two tales is the fable of the
monkey’s paw, written by W. W. Jacobs, an English writer of
the beginning of the century. A retired English workingman is


===== PDF PAGE 293 =====

244                                                        Chapter IX



sitting at his table with his wife and a friend, a returned British
sergeant-­major from India. The sergeant-­major shows his hosts
an amulet in the form of a dried, wizened monkey’s paw. This
has been endowed by an Indian holy man, who has wished to
show the folly of defying fate, with the power of granting three
wishes to each of three people. The soldier says that he knows
nothing of the first two wishes of the first owner, but the last one
was for death. He himself, as he tells his friends, was the second
owner but will not talk of the horror of his own experiences. He
casts the paw into the fire, but his friend retrieves it and wishes
to test its powers. His first is for £200. Shortly thereafter there is
a knock at the door, and an official of the company by which his
son is employed enters the room. The father learns that his son
has been killed in the machinery, but that the company, with-
out recognizing any responsibility or legal obligation, wishes to
pay the father the sum of £200 as a solatium. The grief-­stricken
father makes his second wish—­that his son may return—­and
when there is another knock at the door and it is opened,
something appears which, we are not told in so many words,
is the ghost of the son. The final wish is that this ghost should
go away.
   In all these stories the point is that the agencies of magic are
literal-­minded; and that if we ask for a boon from them, we must
ask for what we really want and not for what we think we want.
The new and real agencies of the learning machine are also
literal-­minded. If we program a machine for winning a war, we
must think well what we mean by winning. A learning machine
must be programmed by experience. The only experience of a
nuclear war which is not immediately catastrophic is the experi-
ence of a war game. If we are to use this experience as a guide for
our procedure in a real emergency, the values of winning which


===== PDF PAGE 294 =====

On Learning and Self-­Reproducing Machines                       245



we have employed in the programming games must be the same
values which we hold at heart in the actual outcome of a war.
We can fail in this only at our immediate, utter, and irretrievable
peril. We cannot expect the machine to follow us in those preju-
dices and emotional compromises by which we enable ourselves
to call destruction by the name of victory. If we ask for victory
and do not know what we mean by it, we shall find the ghost
knocking at our door.
   So much for learning machines. Now let me say a word or two
about self-­propagating machines. Here both the words machine
and self-­propagating are important. The machine is not only a
form of matter, but an agency for accomplishing certain definite
purposes. And self-­propagation is not merely the creation of a
tangible replica; it is the creation of a replica capable of the same
functions.
   Here, two different points of view come into evidence. One
of these is purely combinatorial and concerns the question
whether a machine can have enough parts and sufficiently com-
plicated structure to enable self-­reproduction to be among its
functions. This question has been answered in the affirmative
by the late John von Neumann. The other question concerns
an actual operative procedure for building self-­
                                                reproducing
machines. Here I shall confine my attentions to a class of
machines which, while it does not embrace all machines, is of
great generality. I refer to the non-­linear transducer.
   Such machines are apparatuses which have as an input a sin-
gle function of time and which have as their output another
function of time. The output is completely determined by the
past of the input; but in general, the adding of inputs does not
add the corresponding outputs. Such pieces of apparatus are
known as transducers. One property of all transducers, linear


===== PDF PAGE 295 =====

246                                                       Chapter IX



or non-­linear, is an invariance with respect to a translation in
time. If a machine performs a certain function, then, if the input
is shifted back in time, the output is shifted back by the same
amount.
   Basic to our theory of self-­reproducing machines is a canoni-
cal form of the representation of non-­linear transducers. Here
the notions of impedance and admittance, which are so essen-
tial in the theory of linear apparatus, are not fully appropriate.
We shall have to refer to certain newer methods of carrying out
this representation, methods developed partly by me7 and partly
by Professor Dennis Gabor8 of the University of London.
   While both Professor Gabor’s methods and my own lead
to the construction of non-­linear transducers, they are linear to
the extent that the non-­linear transducer is represented with an
output which is the sum of the outputs of a set of non-­linear
transducers with the same input. These outputs are combined
with varying linear coefficients. This allows us to employ the
theory of linear developments in the design and specification
of the non-­
           linear transducer. And in particular, this method
allows us to obtain coefficients of the constituent elements by
a least-­square process. If we join this to a method of statistically
averaging over the set of all inputs to our apparatus, we have
essentially a branch of the theory of orthogonal development.
Such a statistical basis of the theory of non-­linear transducers
can be obtained from an actual study of the past statistics of the
inputs used in each particular case.
   This is a rough account of Professor Gabor’s methods. While
mine are essentially similar, the statistical basis for my work is
slightly different.
   It is well known that electrical currents are not conducted
continuously but by a stream of electrons which must have


===== PDF PAGE 296 =====

On Learning and Self-­Reproducing Machines                       247



statistical variations from uniformity. These statistical fluctua-
tions can be represented fairly by the theory of the Brownian
motion, or by the similar theory of shot effect or tube noise,
about which I am going to say something in the next chapter.
At any rate, apparatus can be made to generate a standardized
shot effect with highly specific statistical distribution, and such
apparatus is being manufactured commercially. Note that tube
noise is in a sense a universal input in that its fluctuations over
a sufficiently long time will sooner or later approximate to any
given curve. This tube noise possesses a very simple theory of
integration and averaging.
   In terms of the statistics of tube noise, we can easily deter-
mine a closed set of normal and orthogonal non-­linear opera-
tions. If the inputs subject to these operations have the statistical
distribution appropriate to tube noise, the average product of
the output of two component pieces of our apparatus, where
this average is taken with respect to the statistical distribution
of tube noise, will be zero. Moreover, the mean square output
of each apparatus can be normalized to one. The result is that
the development of the general non-­linear transducer in terms
of these components results from an application of the familiar
theory of orthonormal functions.
   To be specific, our individual pieces of apparatus give outputs
which are products of Hermite polynomials in the Laguerre coef-
ficients of the past of the input. This is presented in detail in my
Nonlinear Problems in Random Theory.
   It is of course difficult to average in the first instance over
a set of possible inputs. What makes this difficult task realiz-
able is that the shot-­effect inputs possess the property known as
metric transitivity, or the ergodic property. Any integrable func-
tion of the parameter of distribution of shot-­effect inputs has in


===== PDF PAGE 297 =====

248                                                     Chapter IX



almost every instance a time average equal to its average over the
ensemble. This permits us to take two pieces of apparatus with
a common shot-­effect input, and to determine the average of
their product over the entire ensemble of the possible inputs, by
taking their product and averaging it over the time. The reper-
tory of operations needed for all these processes involves noth-
ing more than the addition of potentials, the multiplication of
potentials, and the operation of averaging over time. Devices
exist for all these. As a matter of fact, the elementary devices
needed in Professor Gabor’s methodology are the same as those
needed in mine. One of his students has invented a particu-
larly effective and inexpensive multiplying device depending
on the piezoelectric effect on a crystal of the attraction of two
magnetic coils.
  What this amounts to is that we can imitate any unknown
non-­linear transducer by a sum of linear terms, each of fixed
characteristics and with an adjustable coefficient. This coeffi-
cient can be determined as the average product of the outputs
of the unknown transducer and a particular known transducer,
when the same shot-­effect generator is connected to the input
of both. What is more, instead of computing this result on the
scale of an instrument and then transferring it by hand to the
appropriate transducer, thus producing a piecemeal simulation
of the apparatus, there is no particular problem in automatically
effecting the transfer of the coefficients to the pieces of feed-
back apparatus. What we have succeeded in doing is to make a
white box which can potentially assume the characteristics of
any non-­linear transducer whatever, and then to draw it into the
similitude of a given black-­box transducer by subjecting the two
to the same random input and connecting the outputs of the


===== PDF PAGE 298 =====

On Learning and Self-­Reproducing Machines                      249



structures in the proper manner, so as to arrive at the suitable
combination without any intervention on our part.
   I ask if this is philosophically very different from what is done
when a gene acts as a template to form other molecules of the
same gene from an indeterminate mixture of amino and nucleic
acids, or when a virus guides into its own form other molecules
of the same virus out of the tissues and juices of its host. I do
not in the least claim that the details of these processes are the
same, but I do claim that they are philosophically very similar
phenomena.


===== PDF PAGE 299 =====



===== PDF PAGE 300 =====

X Brain Waves and Self-­Organizing Systems




In the previous chapter, I discussed the problems of learning and
self-­propagation as they apply both to machines and, at least by
analogy, to living systems. Here I shall repeat certain comments I
made in the Preface and which I intend to put to immediate use.
As I have pointed out, these two phenomena are closely related
to each other, for the first is the basis for the adaptation of the
individual to its environment by means of experience, which
is what we may call ontogenetic learning, while the second, as
it furnishes the material on which variation and natural selec-
tion may operate, is the basis of phylogenetic learning. As I have
already mentioned, the mammals, in particular man, do a large
part of their adjustment to their environment by ontogenetic
learning, whereas the birds, with their highly varied patterns of
behavior which are not learned in the life of the individual, have
devoted themselves much more to phylogenetic learning.
   We have seen the importance of non-­linear feedbacks in the
origination of both processes. The present chapter is devoted
to the study of a specific self-­organizing system in which non-­
linear phenomena play a large part. What I here describe is what
I believe to be happening in the self-­organization of electroen-
cephalograms or brain waves.


===== PDF PAGE 301 =====

252                                                      Chapter X



   Before we can discuss this matter intelligently, I must say
something of what brain waves are and how their structure may
be subjected to precise mathematical treatment. It has been
known for many years that activity of the nervous system is
accompanied by certain electrical potentials. The first observa-
tions in this field go back to the beginning of the last century
and were made by Volta and Galvani in neuromuscular prepara-
tions from the leg of the frog. This was the birth of the science
of electrophysiology. This science, however, advanced rather
slowly until the end of the first quarter of the present century.
   It is well worth reflecting why the development of this branch
of physiology was so slow. The original apparatus used for the
study of physiological electric potential consisted of galvanom-
eters. These had two weaknesses. The first was that the entire
energy involved in moving the coil or needle of the galvanom-
eter came from the nerve itself and was excessively minute. The
second difficulty was that the galvanometer of those times was
an instrument whose mobile parts had quite appreciable iner-
tia, and a very definite restoring force was necessary to bring
the needle to a well-­defined position; that is, in the nature of
the case, the galvanometer was not only a recording instrument
but a distorting instrument. The best of the early physiologi-
cal galvanometers was the string galvanometer of Einthoven,
where the moving parts were reduced to a single wire. Excellent
as this instrument was by the standards of its own time, it was
not good enough to record small electrical potentials without
heavy distortions.
   Thus electrophysiology had to wait for a new technique. This
technique was that of electronics, and took two forms. One of
these was based on Edison’s discovery of certain phenomena
pertaining to the conduction of gases, and from these arose the


===== PDF PAGE 302 =====

Brain Waves and Self-­Organizing Systems                        253



use of the vacuum tube or electric valve for amplification. This
made it possible to give a reasonably faithful transformation of
weak potentials into strong potentials. And so it permitted us to
move the final elements of the recording device by the use of
energy not emanating from the nerve but controlled by it.
   The second invention also involved the conduction of elec-
tricity in vacuo, and is known as the cathode-­ray oscillograph.
This made it possible to use as the moving part of the instru-
ment a much lighter armature than that of any previous galva-
nometer, namely, a stream of electrons. With the aid of these
two devices, separately or together, the physiologists of this cen-
tury have been able to follow faithfully the time course of small
potentials which would have been completely beyond the range
of accurate instrumentation possible in the nineteenth century.
   With these means, we have been able to obtain accurate
records of the time course of the minute potentials arising
between two electrodes placed on the scalp or implanted in the
brain. While these potentials had already been observed in the
nineteenth century, the availability of the new accurate records
excited great hopes among the physiologists of twenty or thirty
years ago. As to the possibilities of using the devices for the
direct study of brain activity, leaders in this field were Berger in
Germany, Adrian and Matthews in England, and Jasper, Davis,
and the Gibbs (husband and wife) in the United States.
   It must be admitted that the later development of electro-
encephalography has up to now been unable to fulfill the rosy
hopes entertained by the early workers in the field. The data
which they obtained were recorded by an ink-­writer. They are
very complicated and irregular curves; and although it was pos-
sible to discern certain predominating frequencies, such as the
alpha rhythm of about 10 oscillations per second, the ink record


===== PDF PAGE 303 =====

254                                                         Chapter X



was not in a suitable form for further mathematical manipula-
tion. The result is that electroencephalography became more an
art than a science, and depended on the ability of the trained
observer to recognize certain properties of the ink record on the
basis of a large experience. This had the very fundamental objec-
tion of making the interpretation of the electroencephalograms
a largely subjective matter.
   In the late twenties and the early thirties, I had become inter-
ested in the harmonic analysis of continuing processes. While
the physicists had previously considered such processes, the
mathematics of harmonic analysis had been almost confined to
the study of either periodic processes or those which in some
sense tended to zero as the time became large, positively or nega-
tively. My work was the earliest attempt to put the harmonic
analysis of continuing processes on a firm mathematical basis.
In this, I found that the fundamental notion was that of autocor-
relation, which had already been used by G. I. Taylor (now Sir
Geoffrey Taylor) in the study of turbulences.1
   This autocorrelation for a time function f(t) is represented by
the time-­mean of the product f(t + τ) by f(t). It is advantageous
to introduce complex functions of the time even though in the
actual cases studied we are dealing with real functions. And now
the auto-­correlation becomes the mean of the product of f(t + τ)
with the conjugate of f(t). Whether we are working with real or
complex functions, the power spectrum of f(t) is given by the
Fourier transform of the autocorrelation.
   I have already spoken of the lack of suitability of ink records for
further mathematical manipulations. Before much could come
of the idea of autocorrelation, it was necessary to replace these
ink records by other records better adapted to instrumentation.
   One of the best ways of recording small fluctuating electric
potentials for further manipulation is the use of magnetic tape.


===== PDF PAGE 304 =====

Brain Waves and Self-­Organizing Systems                       255



This allows the storage of the fluctuating electric potential in a
permanent form which can be used later whenever convenient.
One such instrument was devised about a decade ago in the
Research Laboratory of Electronics of the Massachusetts Insti-
tute of Technology, under the guidance of Professor Walter A.
Rosenblith and Dr. Mary A. B. Brazier.2
   In this apparatus, magnetic tape is used in its frequency-­
modulation form. The reason for this is that the reading of mag-
netic tape always involves a certain amount of erasure. With
amplitude-­modulation tape, this erasure gives rise to a change in
the message carried, so that in successive readings of the tape we
are actually following a changing message.
   In frequency modulation there is also a certain amount of
erasure, but the instruments by which we read the tape are rela-
tively insensitive to amplitude, and read frequency only. Until
the tape is so badly erased that it is completely unreadable, the
partial erasure of the tape does not distort appreciably the mes-
sage which it carries. The result is that the tape can be read very
many times with substantially the same accuracy with which it
was first read.
   As will be seen from the nature of the autocorrelation, one of
the tools which we need is a mechanism which will delay the
reading of tape by an adjustable amount. If a length of the mag-
netic tape record having time-­duration A is played on an appa-
ratus having two playback heads, one following the other, two
signals are generated which are the same except for a relative
displacement in time. The time displacement depends on the
distance between the playback heads and on the tape speed, and
can be varied at will. We can call one of these f(t) and the other
f(t + τ), where τ is the time displacement. The product of the two
can be formed, for example, by using square-­law rectifiers and
linear mixers, and taking advantage of the identity


===== PDF PAGE 305 =====

256                                                    Chapter X




4ab = ( a + b ) − ( a − b )
               2          2
                                                         (10.01)

The product can be averaged approximately by integrating with
a resistor-­capacitor network having a time constant long com-
pared with the duration A of the sample. The resulting average
is proportional to the value of the autocorrelation function for
delay τ. Repetition of the process for various values of τ yields
a set of values of the autocorrelation (or rather, the sampled
autocorrelation over a large time base A). The accompanying
graph, Fig. 9, shows a plot of an actual autocorrelation of this
sort.3 Let us note that we have shown only half the curve, for




Fig. 9


===== PDF PAGE 306 =====

Brain Waves and Self-­Organizing Systems                        257



the autocorrelation for negative times would be the same as that
for positive times, at least if the curve of which we are taking the
autocorrelation is real.
   Note that similar autocorrelation curves have been used for
many years in optics, and that the instrument by which they
have been obtained is the Michelson interferometer, Fig. 10. By
a system of mirrors and lenses, the Michelson interferometer
divides a beam of light into two parts which are sent on paths of
different length and then reunited into one beam. Different path
lengths result in different time delays, and the resultant beam
is the sum of two replicas of the incoming beam, which may
once more be termed f(t) and j(t + τ). When the beam intensity
is measured with a power-­sensitive photo-­meter, the reading of




Fig. 10


===== PDF PAGE 307 =====

258                                                       Chapter X



the photometer is proportional to the square of f(t) + f(t + τ), and
hence contains a term proportional to the autocorrelation. In
other words, the intensity of the interferometer fringes (except
for a linear transformation) will give us the autocorrelation.
   All of this was implicit in Michelson’s work. It will be seen
that, by carrying out a Fourier transformation on the fringes,
the interferometer yields us the power spectrum of the light, and
is in fact a spectrometer. It is indeed the most accurate type of
spectrometer known to us.
   This type of spectrometer has only come into its own in recent
years. I am told that it is now accepted as an important tool for
precision measurements. The significance of this is that the tech-
niques which I shall now present for the working up of autocor-
relation records are equally applicable in spectroscopy and offer
methods of pushing to the limit the information which can be
yielded by a spectrometer.
   Let us discuss the technique of obtaining the spectrum of a
brain wave from an autocorrelation. Let C(t) be an autocorrela-
tion of f(t). Then C(t) can be written in the form
          ∞
C (t ) = ∫ e 2πiωt dF (ω )                                  (10.02)
          −∞


Here F is always an increasing or at least a non-­decreasing func-
tion of w, and we shall term it the integrated spectrum of f. In
general, this integrated spectrum is made in three parts, com-
bined additively. The line part of the spectrum increases only
at a denumerable set of points. Take this away, and we are left
with a continuous spectrum. This continuous spectrum itself is
the sum of two parts, one of which increases only over a set of
measure zero, while the other part is absolutely continuous and
is the integral of a positive integrable function.


===== PDF PAGE 308 =====

Brain Waves and Self-­Organizing Systems                        259



    From now on let us suppose that the first two parts of the
spectrum—­
         the discrete part and the continuous part which
increases over a set of measure zero—­are missing. In this case,
we can write
          ∞
C (t ) = ∫ e 2πiωt φ (ω ) dω                                (10.03)
          −∞


where ϕ(ω) is the spectral density. If ϕ(ω) is of Lebesgue class L2,
we can write
           ∞
φ (ω ) = ∫ C (t ) e −2πiωt dt                               (10.04)
          −∞


    As will be seen by looking at the autocorrelation of the brain
waves, the predominating part of the power of the spectrum is
in the neighborhood of 10 cycles. In such a case, ϕ(ω) will have
a shape similar to the following diagram.




    The two peaks near 10 and −10 are mirror images of each
other. The ways of performing a Fourier analysis numerically
are various, including the use of integrating instruments and
numerical computing processes. In both cases, it is an inconve-
nience to the work that the principal peaks are near 10 and −10
and not near 0. However, there are modes of transferring the
harmonic analysis to the neighborhood of zero frequency which
greatly cut down the work to be performed. Notice that
                 ∞
φ (ω − 10 ) = ∫ C (t ) e 20πit e −2πiωt dt                  (10.05)
                 −∞


===== PDF PAGE 309 =====

260                                                        Chapter X



   In other words, if we multiply C(t) by e20πit, our new harmonic
analysis will give us a band in the neighborhood of zero fre-
quency and another band in the neighborhood of frequency +
20. If we then perform such a multiplication and remove the +
20 band by averaging methods equivalent to the use of a wave
filter, we shall have reduced our harmonic analysis to one in the
neighborhood of zero frequency.
   Now

e 20πit = cos 20πt + i sin 20πt                              (10.06)

Therefore, the real and imaginary parts of the C(t)·e20πit are given,
respectively, by C(t) cos 20πt and iC(t) sin 20πt. The removal of
the frequencies in the neighborhood of + 20 can be performed
by putting these two functions through a low-­pass filter, which
is equivalent to averaging them over an interval of a twentieth
of a second or greater.
   Suppose that we have a curve where most of the power is
nearly at a frequency of 10 cycles. When we multiply this by the
cosine or sine of 20πt, we shall get a curve which is the sum of
two parts, one of them behaving locally like this:




and the other like this:


===== PDF PAGE 310 =====

Brain Waves and Self-­Organizing Systems                        261



      When we average the second curve over the time for a length
of a tenth of a second, we get zero. When we average the first
one, we get half of the maximum height. The result is that, by
the smoothing of C(t) cos 20πt and iC(t) sin 20πt, we get, respec-
tively, good approximations to the real and imaginary part of
a function having all of its frequencies in the neighborhood of
zero, and this function will have the distributional frequency
around zero that one part of the spectrum of C(t) has around 10.
Now let K1(t) be the result of smoothing C(t) cos 20πt and K2(t)
the result of smoothing C(t) sin 20πt. We wish to obtain
 ∞
∫ [ K (t ) + iK (t )] e π ω dt
 −∞
        1        2
                        −2 i t

                                                            (10.07)
           ∞
     = ∫ [ K1 (t ) + iK2 (t )][cos 2πωt − i sin 2πωt ] dt
           −∞


This expression must be real, since it is a spectrum. Therefore, it
will equal
 ∞                               ∞
∫ K (t ) cos 2πωt dt + ∫ K (t ) sin 2πωt dt
 −∞
       1
                             −∞
                                     2                      (10.08)

In other words, if we make a cosine analysis of K1 and a sine anal-
ysis of K2, and add them together, we shall have the displaced
spectrum of f. It can be shown that K1 will be even and K2 will be
odd. This means that if we do a cosine analysis of K1 and add or
subtract the sine analysis of K2, we shall obtain, respectively, the
spectrum to the right and to the left of the central frequency at
the distance ω. This method for obtaining the spectrum we shall
describe as the method of heterodyning.
      In the case of autocorrelations which are locally nearly sinu-
soidal of period, say 0.1 (such as that which appears in the brain-­
wave autocorrelation of Fig. 9), the computation involved in this
method of heterodyning may be simplified. We take our auto-
correlation at intervals of a fortieth of a second. We then take
the sequence at 0, 1/20 second, 2/20 second, 3/20 second, and


===== PDF PAGE 311 =====

262                                                      Chapter X



so on, and change the sign of those fractions with odd numera-
tors. We average these consecutively for a suitable length of run
and get a quantity nearly equal to K1(t). If we work similarly with
the values at 1/40 second, 3/40 second, 5/40 second, and so on,
changing the sign of alternate quantities, and perform the same
averaging process as before, we get an approximation to K2(t).
From this stage on the procedure is clear.
   The justification for this procedure is that the distribution of
mass which is

 1 at points 2π n
−1 at points (2n + 1) π

while it is zero elsewhere, when it is subject to a harmonic analy-
sis, will contain a cosine component of frequency 1 and no sine
component. Similarly, a distribution of mass which is

 1 at (2n + 1 2 ) π
−1 at (2n − 1 2 ) π

and

0 elsewhere

will contain the sine component of frequency 1 and no cosine
component. Both distributions will also contain components of
frequencies N; but since the original curve which we are ana-
lyzing is wanting or nearly wanting at these frequencies, these
terms will produce no effect. This greatly simplifies our hetero-
dyning, because the only factors which we have to multiply by
are + 1 or − 1.
   We have found this method of heterodyning very useful in
the harmonic analysis of brain waves when we have only manual
means at our disposal, and when the bulk of the work becomes


===== PDF PAGE 312 =====

Brain Waves and Self-­Organizing Systems                        263



overwhelming if we carry through all the details of the harmonic
analysis without the use of heterodyning. All of our earlier work
with the harmonic analysis of brain spectra has been done by
the heterodyning method. Since, however, it later proved pos-
sible to obtain the use of a digital computer for which reducing
the bulk of the work is not such a serious consideration, much
of our later work in harmonic analysis has been done directly
without the use of heterodyning. There will still be much work
to be done in places where digital computers are not available,
so that I do not consider the heterodyning method obsolete
in practice.
   I am presenting here portions of a specific autocorrelation
which we have obtained in our work. Since the autocorrelation
covers a great length of data, it is not suitable for reproducing as
a whole here, and we give merely the beginning, in the neigh-
borhood τ = 0, and a portion of it further out.
   Figure 11 represents the results of a harmonic analysis of the
autocorrelation of which part is exhibited in Fig. 9. In this case,
our result was obtained with a high-­speed digital computer,4 but
we have found a very good concordance between this spectrum
and the one we obtained earlier through heterodyning methods
by hand, at least in the neighborhood of the strong part of the
spectrum.
   When we inspect the curve, we find a remarkable drop in
power in the neighborhood of frequency 9.05 cycles per second.
The point at which the spectrum substantially fades out is very
sharp and gives an objective quantity which can be verified with
much greater accuracy than any quantity so far occurring in
electroencephalography. There is a certain amount of indication
that in other curves which we have obtained, but which are of
somewhat questionable reliability in their details, this sudden


===== PDF PAGE 313 =====

264                                                       Chapter X




Fig. 11


fall-­off in power is followed quite shortly by a sudden rise, so
that between them we have a dip in the curve. Whether this be
the case or not, there is a strong suggestion that the power in the
peak corresponds to a pulling of the power away from the region
where the curve is low.
   In the spectrum which we have obtained, it is worth noting
that the overwhelming part of the peak lies within a range of
about a third of a cycle. An interesting thing is that with another
electroencephalogram of the same subject recorded four days
later, this approximate width of the peak is retained and there is
more than a suggestion that the form is retained in some detail.
There is also reason to believe that with other subjects the width
of the peak will be different and perhaps narrower. A thoroughly
satisfactory verification of this waits for investigations yet to be
made.


===== PDF PAGE 314 =====

Brain Waves and Self-­Organizing Systems                        265



      It is highly desirable that the sort of work which we have
mentioned in these suggestions be followed up by more accurate
instrumental work with better instruments so that the sugges-
tions which we here make can be definitely verified or definitely
rejected.
      I now wish to take up the sampling problem. For this I shall
have to introduce some ideas from my previous work on inte-
gration in function space.5 With the aid of this tool, we shall be
able to construct a statistical model of a continuing process with
a given spectrum. While this model is not an exact replica of the
process that generates brain waves, it is near enough to it to yield
statistically significant information concerning the root-­mean-­
square error to be expected in brain-­wave spectra such as the one
already presented in this chapter.
      I here state without proof some properties of a certain real
function x(t, α) already stated in my paper on generalized
harmonic analysis and elsewhere.1 The real function x(t, α) is
dependent on a variable t running from −∞ to ∞ and a variable α
running from 0 to 1. It represents one space variable of a Brown-
ian motion dependent on the time t and the parameter α of a
statistical distribution. The expression
 ∞
∫ φ (t ) dx (t , α )
 −∞
                                                            (10.09)

is defined for all functions ϕ(t) of Lebesgue class L2 from −∞ to
∞. If ϕ(t) has a derivative belonging to L2, Expression 10.09 is
defined as
     ∞
− ∫ x (t , α ) φ ′ (t ) dt                                  (10.10)
     −∞


and is then defined for all functions ϕ(t) belonging to L2 by a
certain well-­defined limit process. Other integrals


===== PDF PAGE 315 =====

266                                                               Chapter X



 ∞       ∞
∫  ∫ K (τ , τ ) dx (τ , α ) dx (τ , α )
 −∞      −∞
                  1       n         1                n              (10.11)

are defined in a similar manner. The fundamental theorem of
which we make use is that
 1       ∞        ∞
∫ dα ∫  ∫ K (τ , , τ ) dx (τ , α ) dx (τ , α )
 0      −∞        −∞
                          1         n       1            n          (10.12)

is obtained by putting

K1 (τ1 , , τ n 2 ) = ∑ K (σ1 , σ 2 ,  , σ n )                     (10.13)

where the τk are formed in all possible ways by identifying all
pairs of the σk with each other (if n is even), and forming
 ∞       ∞
∫  ∫ K (τ , , τ ) dτ , , dτ
 −∞      −∞
              1       1       n2        1       n2                  (10.14)

If n is odd,
 1       ∞        ∞
∫ dα ∫  ∫ K (τ , , τ ) dx (τ , α ) dx (τ , α ) = 0
 0      −∞        −∞
                          1         n       1            n          (10.15)

      Another important theorem concerning these stochastic inte-
grals is that if  { g } is a functional of g(t), such that  [ x (t, α )] is
a function belonging to L in α and depending only on the differ-
ences x(t2, α) − x(t1, α), then for each t1 for almost all values of α

    1 A                        1
lim   ∫   [ x (t , α )] dt = ∫  [ x (t1 , α )] dα                 (10.16)
A→∞ A  0                       0


This is the ergodic theorem of Birkhoff, and has been proved by
the author6 and others.
      It has been established in the Acta Mathematica paper already
mentioned that if U is a real unitary transformation of the func-
tion K(t),
 ∞                             ∞
∫ UK (t ) dx (t , α ) = ∫ K (t ) dx (t , β )
 −∞                            −∞
                                                                    (10.17)


===== PDF PAGE 316 =====

Brain Waves and Self-­Organizing Systems                                           267



where β differs from a only by a measure-­preserving transforma-
tion of the interval (0, 1) into itself.
      Now let K(t) belong to L2, and let
              ∞
K (t ) = ∫ q (ω ) e 2πiωt dω                                                    (10.18)
              −∞


in the Plancherel7 sense. Let us examine the real function
                   ∞
f (t , α ) = ∫ K (t + τ ) dx (τ , α )                                           (10.19)
                   −∞


which represents the response of a linear transducer to a Brown-
ian input. This will have the autocorrelation

        1 T
              f (t + τ , α ) f (t , α ) dt
       2T ∫−T
lim                                                                             (10.20)
T →∞


and this, by the ergodic theorem, will have for almost all values
of α the value
 1        ∞                           ∞
∫ dα ∫ K (t + τ ) dx (t , α )∫ K (t ) dx (t , α )
 0       −∞
                       1          1
                                      −∞
                                               2       2
                                                                                (10.21)
         ∞
     = ∫ K (t + τ ) K (t ) dt
         −∞


The spectrum will then almost always be
 ∞                      ∞
∫ e π ωτ dτ ∫ K (t + τ ) K (t ) dt
 −∞
       −2 i
                        −∞
         ∞                        2
     = ∫ K (τ ) e −2π iωτ dτ                                                    (10.22)
         −∞

     = q (ω )
                   2



      This is, however, the true spectrum. The sampled autocorrela-
tion over the averaging time A (in our case 2700 seconds) will be

1 A
     f (t + τ , α ) f (t , α ) dt
A ∫0
                                                                                (10.23)
         ∞                   ∞             1 A
     = ∫ dx (t1 , α )∫ dx (t 2 , α )
                                           A ∫0
                                                K (t1 + τ + s) K (t 2 + s) ds
         −∞                  −∞


===== PDF PAGE 317 =====

268                                                                                  Chapter X



The resulting sampled spectrum will almost always have the
time average

 ∞             1    A       ∞
∫ e π ωτ dτ A ∫ ds∫ K (t +τ + s) K (t + s) dt = q (ω )
       −2 i                                                              2
                                                                                       (10.24)
 −∞                 0       −∞


That is, the sampled spectrum and the true spectrum will have
the same time-­average value.
      For many purposes, we are interested in the approximate spec-
trum, in which the integration of τ is carried out only over (0,
B), where B is 20 seconds in the particular case we have already
exhibited. Let us remember that f(t) is real, and that the auto-
correlation is a symmetrical function. Therefore, we can replace
integration from 0 to B by integration from −B to B:
 B             ∞                 ∞              1   A
∫ e π τ dτ ∫ dx (t , α )∫ dx (t , α ) A ∫ K (t + τ + s)
 −B
       −2 iu
               −∞
                        1
                                 −∞
                                      2
                                                    0
                                                              1
                                                                                       (10.25)
                                                        × K (t 2 + s) ds

This will have as its mean
 B             ∞                           B                   ∞
∫ e π τ dτ ∫ K (t + τ ) K (t ) dt = ∫ e π τ dτ ∫                    q (ω ) e 2πiτω dω
       −2 iu                                    −2 iu                        2
 −B            −∞                          −B                  −∞
                                           ∞                 sin 2π B (ω − u )
                                      =∫        q (ω )
                                                         2
                                                                               dω
                                           −∞                   π (ω − u )
                                                                                       (10.26)
      The square of the approximate spectrum taken over (−B, B)
will
                                                                                           2
 B             ∞                 ∞              1   A
∫ e π τ dτ ∫ dx (t , α )∫ dx (t , α ) A ∫ K (t + τ + s) K (t + s) ds
 −B
       −2 iu
               −∞
                        1
                                 −∞
                                      2
                                                    0
                                                              1                  2



which will have as its mean


===== PDF PAGE 318 =====

Brain Waves and Self-­Organizing Systems                                                             269



    B                   B                   1      A               A          ∞        ∞
∫ e π τ dτ ∫ e π τ dτ A ∫ ds∫ dσ ∫ dt ∫ dt
    −B
         −2 iu
                       −B
                            −2 iu 1
                                       1       2   0               0          −∞
                                                                                   1
                                                                                       −∞
                                                                                            2


          ×  K (t1 + τ + s) K (t1 + s) K (t 2 + τ1 + σ )K (t 2 + σ )
          + K (t1 + τ + s) K (t 2 + s) K (t1 + τ 1 + σ )K (t 2 + σ )
          + K (t1 + τ + s) K (t 2 + s) K (t 2 + τ1 + σ )K (t1 + σ )
                                                                       2
           ∞        2 sin 2π B (ω − u )    
        =  ∫ q (ω )                     dω 
           −∞            π (ω − u )        
                 ∞                     ∞
          +∫         q (ω1 ) dω1 ∫         q (ω 2 ) dω 2
                                2                              2
               −∞                     −∞
                                                                                                  (10.27)
                                           2
            sin 2π B (ω1 − u )  sin Aπ (ω1 − ω 2 )   2
          ×                    
            π (ω1 − u )  π 2 A2 (ω1 − ω 2 )
                                                 2

                 ∞                     ∞
          +∫         q (ω1 ) dω1 ∫         q (ω 2 ) dω 2
                                2                              2
               −∞                     −∞
                                           2
            sin 2π B (ω1 + u )  sin 2π B (ω 2 − u ) sin2 Aπ (ω1 − ω 2 )
          ×                    
            π (ω1 + u )            π (ω 2 − u )      π 2 A2 (ω1 − ω 2 )2

It is well known that, if m is used to express a mean,

m [ λ − m ( λ )] = m ( λ 2 ) − [ m ( λ )]
                        2                                      2
                                                                                                  (10.28)

Hence the root-­mean-­square error of the approximate sampled
spectrum will be equal to

               ∞                      ∞                                    sin2 Aπ (ω1 − ω 2 )
           ∫         q (ω1 ) dω1 ∫         q (ω 2 ) dω 2
                            2                              2
               −∞                     −∞                                    π 2 A2 (ω1 − ω 2 )2
                                                                                                  (10.29)
       sin 2π B (ω1 − u ) sin 2π B (ω1 + u ) sin 2π B (ω 2 − u ) 
                 2
     ×                   +
       π 2 (ω1 − u )2        π (ω1 + u )        π (ω 2 − u ) 

        Now,

    ∞ sin2 Aπ u        1
∫   −∞ π 2 A2 u 2
                  du =
                       A
                                                                                                  (10.30)

Thus


===== PDF PAGE 319 =====

270                                                       Chapter X



    ∞             sin2 Aπ (ω − u )
∫ g (ω ) π A (ω − u) dω
    −∞                2   2       2
                                                            (10.31)


is 1/A multiplied by a running weighted average of g(ω). In case
the quantity averaged is nearly constant over the small range
1/A, which is here a reasonable assumption, we shall obtain as
an approximate dominant of the root-­mean-­square error at any
point of the spectrum

                4 sin 2π B (ω − u )
                      2
    2 ∞
     ∫
    A −∞
         q (ω )
                     π 2 (ω − u )2
                                    dω                      (10.32)


         Let us notice that if the approximate sampled spectrum has
its maximum at u = 10, its value there will be
    ∞                 sin 2π B (ω − 10 )
∫        q (ω )
                  2
                                         dω                 (10.33)
    −∞                   π (ω − 10 )

which for smooth q(ω) will not be far from |q(10)|2. The root-­
mean-­square error of the spectrum referred to this as a unit of
measurement will be
                          4
    2 ∞ q (ω ) sin2 2π B (ω − 10 )
    A ∫−∞ q (10 )
                                   dω                       (10.34)
                  π 2 (ω − 10 )2

and hence no greater than

    2 ∞ sin2 2π B (ω − 10 )        B
    A ∫−∞ π 2 (ω − 10 )2
                            dω = 2                          (10.35)
                                   A

In the case we have considered, this will be

          20      1   1
2             =2    ≈                                       (10.36)
         2700    135 6

         If we assume then that the dip phenomenon is real, or even
that the sudden fall-­
                     off which takes place in our curve at a


===== PDF PAGE 320 =====

Brain Waves and Self-­Organizing Systems                       271



frequency of about 9.05 cycles per second is real, it is worthwhile
asking several physiological questions concerning it. The three
chief questions concern the physiological function of these phe-
nomena which we have observed, the physiological mechanism
by which they are produced, and the possible application which
can be made of these observations in medicine.
   Note that a sharp frequency line is equivalent to an accurate
clock. As the brain is in some sense a control and computation
apparatus, it is natural to ask whether other forms of control
and computation apparatus use clocks. In fact most of them do.
Clocks are employed in such apparatus for the purpose of gating.
All such apparatus must combine a large number of impulses into
single impulses. If these impulses are carried by merely switch-
ing the circuit on or off, the timing of the impulses is of small
importance and no gating is needed. However, the consequence
of this method of carrying impulses is that an entire circuit is
occupied until such time as the message is turned off; and this
involves putting a large part of the apparatus out of action for an
indefinite period. It is thus desirable in a computing or control
apparatus that the messages be carried by a combined on-­and-­
off signal. This immediately releases the apparatus for further
use. In order for this to take place, the messages must be stored
so that they can be released simultaneously, and combined
while they are still on the machine. For this a gating is needed,
and this gating can be conveniently carried out by the use of
a clock.
   It is well known that, at least in the case of the longer nerve
fibers, nerve impulses are carried by peaks whose form is inde-
pendent of the manner in which they are produced. The combi-
nation of these peaks is a function of the synaptic mechanism.
In these synapses, a number of incoming fibers are linked to


===== PDF PAGE 321 =====

272                                                       Chapter X



an outgoing fiber. When the proper combination of incom-
ing fibers fires within a very short interval of time, the outgo-
ing fiber fires. In this combination, the effect of the incoming
fibers in certain cases is additive, so that if more than a certain
number fire, a threshold is reached which permits the outgoing
fiber to fire. In other cases some of the incoming fibers have an
inhibitory action, absolutely preventing the firing, or at any rate
increasing the threshold for the other fibers. In either case, a
short combination period is essential, and if the incoming mes-
sages do not lie within this short period, they do not combine.
It is therefore necessary to have some sort of gating mechanism
to permit the incoming messages to arrive substantially simul-
taneously. Otherwise the synapse will fail to act as a combining
mechanism.8
   It is desirable, however, to have further evidence that this gat-
ing actually takes place. Here some work of Professor Donald B.
Lindsley of the psychology department of the University of Cali-
fornia at Los Angeles is relevant. He has made a study of reaction
times for visual signals. As is well known, when a visual signal
arrives, the muscular activity which it stimulates does not occur
at once, but after a certain delay. Professor Lindsley has shown
that this delay is not constant, but seems to consist of three
parts. One of these parts is of constant length, whereas the other
two appear to be uniformly distributed over about 1/10 second.
It is as if the central nervous system could pick up incoming
impulses only every 1/10 second, and as if the outgoing impulses
to the muscles could arrive from the central nervous system only
every 1/10 second. This is experimental evidence of a gating;
and the association of this gating with 1/10 second, which is the
approximate period of the central alpha rhythm of the brain, is
very probably not fortuitous.


===== PDF PAGE 322 =====

Brain Waves and Self-­Organizing Systems                            273



   So much for the function of the central alpha rhythm. Now
the question arises concerning the mechanism producing this
rhythm. Here we must bring up the fact that the alpha rhythm
can be driven by flicker. If a light is flickered into the eye at inter-
vals with a period near 1/10 second, the alpha rhythm of the
brain is modified until it has a strong component of the same
period as the flicker. Unquestionably the flicker produces an
electrical flicker in the retina, and almost certainly in the central
nervous system.
   There is, however, some direct evidence that a purely electri-
cal flicker may produce an effect similar to that of the visual
flicker. This experiment has been carried out in Germany. A room
was made with a conducting floor and an insulated conducting
metal plate suspended from the ceiling. Subjects were placed in
this room, and the floor and the ceiling were connected to a
generator producing an alternating electrical potential which
may have been at a frequency near 10 cycles per second. The
experienced effect on the subjects was very disturbing, in much
the same manner as the effect of a similar flicker is disturbing.
   It will, of course, be necessary for these experiments to be
repeated under more controlled conditions, and for the simul-
taneous electroencephalogram of the subjects to be taken. How-
ever, as far as the experiments go, there is an indication that the
same effect as that of the visual flicker may be generated by an
electrical flicker produced by electrostatic induction.
   It is important to observe that if the frequency of an oscil-
lator can be changed by impulses of a different frequency, the
mechanism must be non-­linear. A linear mechanism acting on
an oscillation of a given frequency can produce only oscillation
of the same frequency, generally with some change of phase and
amplitude. This is not true for non-­linear mechanisms, which


===== PDF PAGE 323 =====

274                                                      Chapter X



may produce oscillations of frequencies which are the sum and
differences of different orders, of the frequency of the oscillator
and the frequency of the imposed disturbance. It is quite pos-
sible for such a mechanism to displace a frequency; and in the
case which we have considered, this displacement will be of the
nature of an attraction. It is not too improbable that this attrac-
tion will be a long-­time or secular phenomenon, and that for
short times this system will remain approximately linear.
   Consider the possibility that the brain contains a number
of oscillators of frequencies of nearly 10 per second, and that
within limitations these frequencies can be attracted to one
another. Under such circumstances, the frequencies are likely
to be pulled together into one or more little clumps, at least in
certain regions of the spectrum. The frequencies that are pulled
into these clumps will have to be pulled away from somewhere,
thus causing gaps in the spectrum, where the power is lower
than that which we should otherwise expect. That such a phe-
nomenon may actually take place in the generation of brain
waves for the individual whose autocorrelation is shown in Fig.
9 is suggested by the sharp drop in the power for frequencies
above 9.0 cycles per second. This could not easily have been
discovered with the low resolving powers of harmonic analysis
used by earlier writers.9
   In order that this account of the origin of brain waves should
be tenable, we must examine the brain for the existence and
nature of the oscillators postulated. Professor Rosenblith of
M.I.T. has informed me of the existence of a phenomenon
known as the after-­discharge.10 When a flash of light is delivered
to the eyes, the potentials of the cerebral cortex which can be
correlated with the flash do not return immediately to zero, but
go through a sequence of positive and negative phases before


===== PDF PAGE 324 =====

Brain Waves and Self-­Organizing Systems                         275



they die out. The pattern of this potential can be subjected to a
harmonic analysis and is found to have a large amount of power
in the neighborhood of 10 cycles. As far as this goes, it is at least
not contradictory to the theory of brain wave self-­organization
that we have given here. The pulling together of these short-­
time oscillations into a continuing oscillation has been observed
in other bodily rhythms, as for example the approximately
23 21 -hour diurnal rhythm which is observed in many living
beings.11 This rhythm is capable of being pulled into the 24-­hour
rhythm of day and night by the changes in the external envi-
ronment. Biologically it is not important whether the natural
rhythm of living beings is precisely a 24-­hour rhythm, provided
it is capable of being attracted into the 24-­hour rhythm by the
external environment.
   An interesting experiment which may throw light on the
validity of my hypothesis concerning brain waves could quite
possibly be made by the study of fireflies or of other animals
such as crickets or frogs which are capable of emitting detectable
visual or auditory impulses and also capable of receiving these
impulses. It has often been supposed that the fireflies in a tree
flash in unison, and this apparent phenomenon has been put
down to a human optical illusion. I have heard it stated that in
the case of some of the fireflies of Southeastern Asia this phe-
nomenon is so marked that it can scarcely be put down to illu-
sion. Now the firefly has a double action. On the one hand it is
an emitter of more or less periodical impulses, and on the other
hand it possesses receptors for these impulses. Could not the
same supposed phenomenon of the pulling together of frequen-
cies take place? For this work, accurate records of the flashings
are necessary which are good enough to subject to an accurate
harmonic analysis. Moreover, the fireflies should be subjected


===== PDF PAGE 325 =====

276                                                      Chapter X



to periodic light, as for example from a flashing neon tube, and
we should determine whether this has a tendency to pull them
into frequency with itself. If this should be the case, we should
try to obtain an accurate record of these spontaneous flashes
to subject to an autocorrelation analysis similar to that which
we have made in the case of the brain waves. Without daring
to pronounce on the outcome of experiments which have not
been made, this line of research strikes me as promising and not
too difficult.
   The phenomenon of the attraction of frequencies also occurs
in certain non-­living situations. Consider a number of electri-
cal alternators with their frequencies controlled by governors
attached to the prime movers. These governors hold the fre-
quencies in comparatively narrow regions. Suppose the outputs
of the generators to be combined in parallels on busbars from
which the current goes out to the external load, which will in
general be subject to more or less random fluctuations due to
the turning on and off of light and the like. In order to avoid the
human problems of switching which occur in the old-­fashioned
sort of central station, we shall suppose the switching on and
off of the generators to be automatic. When the generator is
brought to a speed and phase near enough to that of the other
generators of the system, an automatic device will connect it to
the busbars, and if by some chance it should depart too far from
the proper frequency and phase, a similar device will automati-
cally switch it off. In such a system, a generator which is tending
to run too fast and thus to have too high a frequency takes a
part of the load which is greater than its normal share, whereas
a generator which is running too slow takes a less than normal
part of the load. The result is that there is an attraction between
the frequencies of the generators. The total generating system


===== PDF PAGE 326 =====

Brain Waves and Self-­Organizing Systems                         277



acts as if it possessed a virtual governor, more accurate than the
governors of the individual governors and constituted by the set
of these governors with the mutual electrical interaction of the
generators. To this the accurate frequency regulation of electrical
generating systems is at least in part due. It is this which makes
possible the use of electrical clocks of high accuracy.
   I therefore suggest that the output of such systems be studied
both experimentally and theoretically in a manner parallel to
that in which we have studied the brain waves.
   Historically it is interesting that in the early days of
alternating-­current engineering, attempts were made to connect
generators of the same constant-­voltage type used in modern
generating systems in series rather than in parallel. It was found
that the interaction of the individual generators in frequency
was a repulsion rather than an attraction. The result was that
such systems were impossibly unstable unless the rotating parts
of the individual generators were connected rigidly by a com-
mon shaft or by gearing. On the other hand the parallel busbar
connection of generators proved to have an intrinsic stability
which made it possible to unite generators at different stations
into a single self-­containing system. To use a biological analogy,
the parallel system had a better homeostasis than the series sys-
tem and therefore survived, while the series system eliminated
itself by natural selection.
   We thus see that a non-­linear interaction causing the attrac-
tion of frequency can generate a self-­organizing system, as it
does, for example, in the case of the brain waves we have dis-
cussed and in the case of the a-­c network. This possibility of self-­
organization is by no means limited to the very low frequency of
these two phenomena. Consider self-­organizing systems at the
frequency level, say, of infrared light or radar spectra.


===== PDF PAGE 327 =====

278                                                        Chapter X



   As we have stated before, one of the prime problems of biol-
ogy is the way in which the capital substances constituting genes
or viruses, or possibly specific substances producing cancer,
reproduce themselves out of materials devoid of this specificity,
such as a mixture of amino and nucleic acids. The usual expla-
nation given is that one molecule of these substances acts as a
template according to which the constituent’s smaller molecules
lay themselves down and unite into a similar macromolecule.
This is largely a figure of speech and is merely another way of
describing the fundamental phenomenon of life, which is that
other macromolecules are formed in the image of the existing
macromolecules. However this process occurs, it is a dynamic
process and involves forces or their equivalent. An entirely pos-
sible way of describing such forces is that the active bearer of
the specificity of a molecule may lie in the frequency pattern
of its molecular radiation, an important part of which may lie
in infra-­red electromagnetic frequency or even lower. It may be
that specific virus substances under some circumstances emit
infra-­
      red oscillations which have the power of favoring the
formation of other molecules of the virus from an indifferent
magma of amino acids and nucleic acids. It is quite possible that
this phenomenon may be regarded as a sort of attractive interac-
tion of frequency. As this whole matter is still sub judice, with the
details not even formulated, I forbear to be more specific. The
obvious way of investigating this is to study the absorption and
emission spectra of a massive quantity of virus material, such
as the crystal of the tobacco mosaic virus, and then to observe
the effects of light of these frequencies on the production of
more virus from existing virus in the proper nutrient mate-
rial. When I speak of absorption spectra, I am talking of a phe-
nomenon which is almost certain to exist; and as to emission


===== PDF PAGE 328 =====

Brain Waves and Self-­Organizing Systems                      279



spectra, we have something of the sort in the phenomenon of
fluorescence.
   Any such research will involve a highly accurate method
for the detailed examination of spectra in the presence of what
would ordinarily be considered excessive amounts of light of a
continuous spectrum. We have already seen that we are faced
with a similar problem in the microanalysis of brain waves, and
that the mathematics of interferometer spectrography is essen-
tially the same as that which we have undertaken here. I then
make the definite suggestion that the full power of this method
be explored in the study of molecular spectra, and in particu-
lar in the study of such spectra of viruses, genes, and cancer. It
is premature to predict the entire value of these methods both
in pure biological research and in medicine, but I have great
hopes that they may be proved to be of the utmost value in
both fields.


===== PDF PAGE 329 =====



===== PDF PAGE 330 =====

Notes




Foreword by Doug Hill


1. John Pfeiffer, “Man’s Brain Child,” New York Times, April 18, 1965,
https://tinyurl.com/y9xccjpu.

2. Kai-­
       Fu Lee, “Tech Companies Should Stop Pretending AI Won’t
Destroy Jobs,” MIT Technology Review, February 21, 2018, https://tinyurl
.com/ya7spngu. In September 2018, Lee published AI Superpowers:
China, Silicon Valley, and the New World Order.

3. See Matthew Desmond, “Americans Want to Believe Jobs Are the
Solution to Poverty. They’re Not.” New York Times Magazine, Septem-
ber 11, 2018, https://tinyurl.com/y7ghzuqp; Eduardo Porter, “Tech Is
Splitting the U.S. Workforce in Two,” New York Times, February 4, 2019,
https://nyti.ms/2DSI2KZ.

4. Amy Bernstein and Anand Raman, “The Great Decoupling: An
Interview with Erik Byrnjolfsson and Andrew McAfee,” Harvard Business
Review, June 2015, https://hbr.org/2015/06/the-great-decoupling

5. Norbert Wiener, “Some Moral and Technical Consequences of Auto-
mation,” Science, New Series 131, no. 3410 (May 6, 1960), 1355.

6. On the 1965 blackout, see James Burke, Connections (Boston: Little,
Brown, 1978), 1–­2; David E. Sanger, “Russian Hackers Appear to Shift
Focus to U.S. Power Grid,” New York Times, July 27, 2018, https://
tinyurl.com/y94f4egl.


===== PDF PAGE 331 =====

282                                                                Notes



7. Nelson D. Schwartz and Louise Story, “High-­Speed Trading Glitch
Costs Investors Billions,” New York Times, May 6, 2010, http://nyti.ms/
aAzXcc; Thomas Heath, “The Warning From JPMorgan about Flash
Crashes Ahead,” Washington Post, September 5, 2018, https://tinyurl
.com/ychvmcve.

8. Norbert Wiener, The Human Use of Human Beings, Houghton Mifflin,
1950, 37.

9. Flo Conway and Jim Siegelman, Dark Hero of the Information Age: In
Search of Nobert Wiener, the Father of Cybernetics (New York: Basic Books,
2004), 4.

10. See the joint edition of his two-­  volume autobiography, Norbert
Wiener: A Life in Cybernetics (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2017), 55, 57.
Ronald R. Kline’s introduction to that edition mentions the original title
of Ex-­Prodigy on p. xii.

11. Conway and Siegelman, Dark Hero, p. 5.

12. Wiener, A Life in Cybernetics, 284.

13. Steve J. Heims, John von Neumann and Norbert Wiener: From Math-
ematics to the Technologies of Life and Death (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1980), 140.

14. N. Katherine Hayles, How We Became Posthuman: Virtual Bodies in
Cybernetics, Literature, and Informatics (Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1999), 18.

15. The conviction that Wiener’s ideas have become increasingly rel-
evant in the digital era inspired the IEEE to sponsor two “Reintroducing
Norbert Wiener in the 21st Century” conferences, one in 2014 and the
second in 2016. See http://21stcenturywiener.org.

16. Conway and Siegelman, Dark Hero, 243.

17. Drew Harwell, “Google to Drop Pentagon AI Contract after
Employee Objections to the ‘Business of War,’” Washington Post, June 1,
2018, https://tinyurl.com/y75e6bn9.


===== PDF PAGE 332 =====

Notes                                                                 283



18. Wiener, Human Use, 17.

19. Conway and Siegelman, Dark Hero, 93–­98, 217–­230; Heims, John von
Neumann and Norbert Wiener, 379–­389.

20. Heims, 377.

21. Conway and Siegelman, Dark Hero, 16; Wiener, A Life in Cybernetics,
459–­460; Heims, 155.

22. See, for example, David Streitfeld, “Tech Giants, Once Seen as
Saviors, Are Now Viewed as Threats,” New York Times, October 12, 2017,
https://tinyurl.com/y8y4qdl2; Noam Cohen, “Silicon Valley Is Not
Your Friend,” New York Times, October 13, 2017, https://tinyurl.com/
y9omhyoe; Jamie Doward, “The Big Tech Backlash,” The Guardian, Janu-
ary 27, 2018, https://tinyurl.com/y77vku5j; and Noah Kulwin, “The
Internet Apologizes,” New York Magazine, April 13, 2018, https://tinyurl
.com/ybtml5d6.


Foreword by Sanjoy K. Mitter


1. Claude E. Shannon, “A Mathematical Theory of Communication,”
Bell System Technical Journal 27, no. 3 (1948): 379–­423, https://doi.org/
10.1002/j.1538-7305.1948.tb01338.x.

2. W. Shockley, “The Theory of p-­n Junctions in Semiconductors and
p-­n Junction Transistors,” Bell System Technical Journal 28 (1949): 435–­
489, https://doi.org/10.1002/j.1538-7305.1949.tb03645.x.

3. A. M. Turing, “On Computable Numbers, with an Application
to the Entscheidungsproblem,” Proceedings of the London Mathematical
Society S2-­
           42 (January 1937): 230–­ 265, https://doi.org/10.1112/plms/
s2-42.1.230; John von Neumann, The Computer and the Brain (New
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1958).

4. Norbert Wiener, Cybernetics, or Control and Communication in the
Animal and the Machine (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1948), 42.

5. Wiener, Cybernetics, 162.


===== PDF PAGE 333 =====

284                                                                   Notes



6. See, for example, Mark Davis and Alison Etheridge, Louis Bachelier’s
Theory of Speculation: The Origins of Modern Finance (Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 2006).

7. See Norbert Wiener, Extrapolation, Interpolation, and Smoothing of
Time Series, with Engineering Applications (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1949).

8. Wiener, Cybernetics, 10, 11.

9. See R. S. Liptser and A. N. Shiryaev, “Computation of Mutual Infor-
mation and Channel Capacity of a Gaussian Channel with Feedback,”
in Statistics of Random Processes, vol. 2 (Berlin: Springer, 1978), 190–­194.

10. W. Feller, An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications,
vol. 2 (New York: Wiley, 1971).

11. R. E. Kalman and R. S. Bucy, “New Results in Linear Filtering and
Predication Theory,” Journal of Basic Engineering 83 (1961): 95–­108,
https://doi.org/10.1115/1.3658902.

12. For an information theoretic interpretation of the Kalman–­      Bucy
filter, see S. K. Mitter and N. J. Newton, “Information and Entropy Flow
in the Kalman–­Bucy Filter,” Journal of Statistical Physics 118, nos. 1–­2
(2005): 145–­176, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10955-004-8781-9; and S. K.
Mitter, “Filtering and Stochastic Control: A Historical Perspective,” IEEE
Control Systems 16 (1996): 67–76, https://doi.org/10.1109/37.506400.

13. Mitter, “Filtering and Stochastic Control.”

14. Wiener’s suggestions have been further developed by G. C. Newton,
L. A. Gould, and J. F. Kaiser in Analytical Design of Linear Feedback Con-
trols (New York: Wiley, 1957).

15. See Mitter, “Filtering and Stochastic Control.”

16. Wiener, Cybernetics, 113.

17. Wiener, 112.

18. Wiener, 57, 58.


===== PDF PAGE 334 =====

Notes                                                                 285



19. H. Sandberg, J.-­C. Delvenne, N. J. Newton, and S. K. Mitter, “Maxi-
mum Work Extraction and Implementation Costs for Nonequilibrium
Maxwell’s Demon,” Physical Review E 90 (2014): 042119, https://doi.org/
10.1103/PhysRevE.90.042119.

20. Mitter, “Filtering and Stochastic Control.”

21. N. Wiener, Nonlinear Problems in Random Theory (Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press, 1966).

22. K. Ito, “Multiple Wiener Integrals,” Journal of the Mathematical Soci-
ety of Japan 3 (1951): 157–­169, https://doi.org/10.2969/jmsj/00310157.

23. Wiener, Cybernetics, 178–­180.

24. N. Wiener, “Generalized Harmonic Analysis,” Acta Mathematica 55
(1930): 117–­258; Wiener, Nonlinear Problems in Random Theory.

25. Wiener, 192.


Preface to the Second Edition


1. Wiener, N., The Human Use of Human Beings; Cybernetics and Society,
Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, 1950.

2. Wiener, N., Nonlinear Problems in Random Theory, The Technology
Press of M.I.T. and John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1958.

3. Here I am using the term “non-­linear system” not to exclude linear
systems but to include a larger category of systems. The analysis of non-­
linear systems by means of random noise is also applicable to linear
systems and has been so used.

4. The terms “black box” and “white box” are convenient and figura-
tive expressions of not very well-determined usage. I shall understand
by a black box a piece of apparatus, such as four-­terminal networks
with two input and two output terminals, which performs a definite
operation on the present and past of the input potential, but for which
we do not necessarily have any information of the structure by which
this operation is performed. On the other hand, a white box will be a


===== PDF PAGE 335 =====

286                                                                 Notes



similar network in which we have built in the relation between input
and output potentials in accordance with a definite structural plan for
securing a previously determined input-­output relation.

5. Bose, A. G., “Nonlinear System Characterization and Optimization,”
IRE Transactions on Information Theory, IT–­5, 30–­40 (1959) (Special
supplement to IRE Transactions).

6. Gabor, D., “Electronic Inventions and Their Impact on Civilization,”
Inaugural Lecture, March 3, 1959, Imperial College of Science and Tech-
nology, University of London, England.

7. Wiener, N., and P. Masani, “The Prediction Theory of Multivariate
Stochastic Processes,” Part I, Acta Mathematica, 98, 111–­150 (1957); Part
II, ibid., 99, 93–­137 (1958). Also Wiener, N., and E. J. Akutowicz, “The
Definition and Ergodic Properties of the Stochastic Adjoint of a Unitary
Transformation,” Rendiconti del Circolo Matematico di Palermo, Ser. II, VI,
205–­217 (1957).

8. Samuel, A. L., “Some Studies in Machine Learning, Using the Game of
Checkers,” IBM Journal of Research and Development, 3, 210–­229 (1959).

9. Watanabe, S., “Information Theoretical Analysis of Multivariate
Correlation,” IBM Journal of Research and Development, 4, 66–­82 (1960).

10. Stanley-­Jones, D., and K. Stanley-­Jones, Kybernetics of Natural Sys-
tems, A Study in Patterns of Control, Pergamon Press, London, 1960.


Introduction


1. MacColl, L. A., Fundamental Theory of Servomechanisms, Van Nos-
trand, New York, 1946.

2. Rosenblueth, A., N. Wiener, and J. Bigelow, “Behavior, Purpose, and
Teleology,” Philosophy of Science, 10, 18–­24 (1943).

3. Kolmogoroff, A. N., “Interpolation und Extrapolation von station-
ären Zufälligen Folgen,” Bull. Acad. Sci. U.S.S.R., Ser. Math. 5, 3–­14
(1941).


===== PDF PAGE 336 =====

Notes                                                                 287



4. Schrödinger, Erwin, What is Life?, Cambridge University Press, Cam-
bridge, England, 1945.

5. Maxwell, J, C., Proc. Roy. Soc. (London), 16, 270–­283, (1868).

6. Turing, A. M., “On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the
Entscheidungsproblem,” Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society,
Ser. 2, 42, 230–­265 (1936).

7. McCulloch, W. S., and W. Pitts, “A logical calculus of the ideas
immanent in nervous activity,” Bull. Math. Biophys, 5, 115–­133 (1943).

8. Levinson, N., J. Math. and Physics, 25, 261–­278; 26, 110–­119 (1947).

9. Lee, Y. W., J. Math. and Physics, 11, 261–­278 (1932).

10. Wiener, N., Extrapolation, Interpolation, and Smoothing of Stationary
Time Series, Technology Press and Wiley, New York, 1949.

11. Wiener, N., and A. Rosenblueth, “The Mathematical Formulation
of the Problem of Conduction of Impulses in a Network of Connected
Excitable Elements, Specifically in Cardiac Muscle,” Arch. Inst. Cardiol.
Méx., 16, 205–­265 (1946).

12. Unpublished articles on clonus from the Instituto Nacional de
Cardiología, Mexico.

13. Fortune, 32, 139–­147 (October); 163–­169 (November, 1945).


Chapter II


1. Oxtoby, J. C., and S. M. Ulam, “Measure-­  Preserving Homeomor-
phisms and Metrical Transitivity.” Ann. of Math., Ser. 2, 42, 874–­920
(1941).

2. Nevertheless some of Osgood’s early work represented an important
step in the direction of the Lebesgue integral.

3. Hopf, E., “Ergodentheorie,” Ergeb. Math., 5, No. 2, Springer, Berlin
(1937).


===== PDF PAGE 337 =====

288                                                                    Notes



4. Wiener, N., The Fourier Integral and Certain of Its Applications, The
University Press, Cambridge, England, 1933; Dover Publications, Inc.,
N.Y.

5. Haar, H., “Der Massbegriff in der Theorie der Kontinuierlichen Grup-
pen.” Ann. of Math., Ser. 2, 34, 147–­169 (1933).


Chapter IV


1. Here the author makes use of a personal communication of J. von
Neumann.

2. Paley, R. E. A. C., and N. Wiener, “Fourier Transforms in the Com-
plex Domain,” Colloquium Publications, Vol. 19, American Mathematical
Society, New York, 1934, Chapter 10.

3. Stieltjes, T. J. Annales de la Fae. des Sc. de Toulouse, 1894, p. 165;
Lebesgue, H., Leçons sur l’Intégration, Gauthier-­Villars et Cie, Paris, 1928.

4. This is the mixing property of Koopman, which is the necessary and
sufficient ergodic assumption to justify statistical mechanics.

5. We refer especially to recent papers by Dr. Y. W. Lee.

6. See writings of R. A. Fisher and J. von Neumann.

1. Poincaré, H., Les Méthodes Nouvelles de la Mécanique Céleste, Gauthier-­
Villars et fils, Paris, 1892–­1899.

2. Cannon, W., The Wisdom of the Body, W. W. Norton & Company,
Inc., New York, 1932; Henderson, L. J., The Fitness of the Environment,
The Macmillan Company, New York, 1913.


Chapter V


1. Journal of the Franklin Institute, various papers, 1930 on.

2. Turing, A. M., “On Computable Numbers with an Application to the
Entscheidungsproblem,” Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society,
Ser. 2, 42, 230–­265 (1936).


===== PDF PAGE 338 =====

Notes                                                                289



Chapter VI


1. Personal communication of Dr. W. Grey Walter, of Bristol, England.


Chapter VII


1. Thompson, D’Arcy, On Growth and Form, Amer. ed., The Macmillan
Company, New York, 1942.


Chapter IX


1. Huxley, J., Evolution: The Modern Synthesis, Harper Bros., New York,
1943.

2. von Neumann, J., and O. Morgenstern, Theory of Games and Economic
Behavior, Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1944.

3. Wiener, N., Extrapolation, Interpolation, and Smoothing of Stationary
Time Series with Engineering Applications, The Technology Press of M.I.T.
and John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1949.

4. Samuel, A. L., “Some Studies in Machine Learning, Using the Game
of Checkers,” IBM Journal of Research and Development, 3, 210–­229
(1959).

5. Watanabe, S., “Information Theoretical Analysis of Multivariate
Correlation,” IBM Journal of Research and Development, 4, 66–­82 (1960).

6. Wiener, N., The Human Use of Human Beings; Cybernetics and Society,
Houghton Mifflin Company, Boston, 1950.

7. Wiener, N., Nonlinear Problems in Random Theory, The Technology
Press of M.I.T. and John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1958.

8. Gabor, D., “Electronic Inventions and Their Impact on Civilization,”
Inaugural Lecture, March 3, 1959, Imperial College of Science and Tech-
nology, University of London, England.


===== PDF PAGE 339 =====

290                                                                 Notes



Chapter X


1. Taylor, G. I., “Diffusion by Continuous Movements,” Proceedings of
the London Mathematical Society, Ser. 2, 20, 196–­212 (1921–­1922).

2. Barlow, J. S., and R. M. Brown, An Analog Correlator System for Brain
Potentials, Technical Report 300, Research Laboratory of Electronics,
M.I.T., Cambridge, Mass. (1955).

3. This work was undertaken with the cooperation of the Neurophysiol-
ogy Laboratory of the Massachusetts General Hospital and the Commu-
nications Biophysics Laboratory of M.I.T.

4. The IBM-­709 at the M.I.T. Computation Center was used.

5. Wiener, N., “Generalized Harmonic Analysis,” Acta Mathematica, 55,
117–­258 (1930); Nonlinear Problems in Random Theory, The Technology
Press of M.I.T. and John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, 1958.

6. Wiener, N., “The Ergodic Theorem,” Duke Mathematical Journal, 5,
1–­39 (1939); also in Modern Mathematics for the Engineer, E. F. Becken-
bach (Ed.), McGraw-­Hill, New York, 1956, pp. 166–­168.

7. Wiener, N., “Plancherel’s Theorem,” The Fourier Integral and Certain
of Its Applications, The University Press, Cambridge, England, 1933,
pp. 46–­71; Dover Publications, Inc., New York.

8. This is a simplified picture of what happens, especially in the cortex,
since the all-­or-­none operation of neurons depends on their being of
a sufficient length so that the remaking of the form of the incoming
impulses in the neuron itself approaches an asymptotic form. However,
in the cortex for example, owing to the shortness of the neurons, the
necessity of synchronization still exists, although the details of the pro-
cess are much more complicated.

9. I must say that some evidence of the existence of narrow central
rhythms has been obtained by Dr. W. Grey Walter of the Burden Neu-
rological Institute in Bristol, England. I am not acquainted with the full
details of his methodology; however, I understand that the phenomenon


===== PDF PAGE 340 =====

Notes                                                                 291



to which he refers consists in the fact that in his toposcopic pictures of
brain waves, as one goes out from the center, the rays indicating the
frequency are confined to relatively narrow sectors.

10. Barlow, J. S., “Rhythmic Activity Induced by Photic Stimulation
in Relation to Intrinsic Alpha Activity of the Brain in Man,” EEG Clin.
Neurophysiol., 12, 317–­326 (1960).

11. Cold Spring Harbor Symposium on Quantitative Biology, Volume XXV
(Biological Clocks), The Biological Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, L.I.,
N.Y., 1960.


===== PDF PAGE 341 =====



===== PDF PAGE 342 =====

Index




Affective tone, 175–­177, 207          coupled to the external world,
Aircraft, military, 8–­11                60–­61
Alpha rhythm of brain, 34, 195,        God and, 58–­59
   273                                 nineteenth-­century study of,
“A Mathematical Theory of                59–­60
   Communication,” xxi                Automation, x–­xi, 39
Amazon, xviii                          in early science, 56–­57
Amount of information, 86–­91,         literal-­minded computers and,
   127–­128                              xii
Analogy machines, 161, 165–­166        speed of, xii
Anthropology, 27–­28
Anticipatory feedback, 153            Background noise, 16
A posteriori knowledge, 87            Barlow, John S., xlvii
A priori probability, 86–­87          Bartlett, F. C., 34
Artificial intelligence and           Bateson, Gregory, 36
   neuroscience, xvi, xxxiii–­xxxiv   Bergson, Henri, 62–­63
Artificial limbs, 38                  Bigelow, Julian H., 10, 11, 13, 14,
Astronomy, 43–­50                        18, 23
 gravitational, 51                    Blind persons, reading by, 33,
Astrophysics, 48–­49                     191–­192
Ataxia, 12–­13, 129–­130              Blueprints, xliv–­xlvi
Autocorrelation, 254–­259             Bohr, Niels, 53
 of brain waves, 259–­265             Borel, Emile, 65
Automata, 57–­62                      Bose, Amar, xli


===== PDF PAGE 343 =====

294                                                              Index



Boyd, Constance D., xlvi            Brazier, Mary A. B., 255
Braille, 33, 191–­192               Bread-­and-­Butter Fly, 176
Brain. See also Nervous system      British empirical school of
 alpha rhythm of, 34, 195, 273          philosophy, 174
 comparison of human versus         Brownian motion, xxv, xxvi, 120
   lower mammal, 210–­214            time series, 98–­105
 death effects on, 205              Brynjolfsson, Erik, x
 functional and organic disorders   Bulletin of Atomic Scientists, xvi
   of, 202–­203                     Bush, Vannevar, 6, 8, 10, 22, 219
 handedness and, 211–­213           Bush differential analyzer, 161
 higher mental functions in,        Butler, Samuel, 39–­40
   202
 injury to, 13, 212                 Calculus ratiocinator, 19
 neurons of, 165–­166, 203–­204,    Caldwell, Samuel, 10
   209–­210                         Cannon, Walter B., 3, 25
 power consumed by, 181–­182        Cantor, Georg, 67
 shock treatment of, 205–­206       Carroll, Lewis, 176
 sleep effects on, 205              Cars, automated, xii
 synapses of, 20–­22, 25, 29,       Cathode-­ray oscillographs, 253
   165–­166, 171, 271–­272          Chain of transmission and return
Brain waves                            of information, 129–­131
 autocorrelation of, 259–­265       Channel capacity, xxii
 defined, 251–­252                  Character groups, 75–­76
 fireflies experiment and,          Chávez, Ignacio, 25, 32
   275–­276                         Checkers, 238
 harmonic analysis of, 254, 263,    Chess-­playing machines,
   275                                 228–­230, 236–­237
 magnetic tape for recording,       Chess theory, 236
   254–­255                         Clerk Maxwell, James, 18, 132
 oscillators of frequencies,        Clonic oscillation, 30–­31
   273–­274                         Collation mechanisms, 200–­201
 sampling problem, 265–­271         Colonies. See Communities
 self-­organization of, 251,        Communal information, 219–­221
   277–­279                         Communication, methods of,
 technology for measurement of,        223–­224
   252–­254                          triple constriction of, 224–­225


===== PDF PAGE 344 =====

Index                                                              295



Communication engineering,            memory and, 166–­169
   14–­17                             numerical, 161–­162, 194
 message-­noise problem in,           pathological processes in, 204
   93–­94                             power consumed by, 181–­182
Communication technologies, xi        for recording information,
Communities, 215–­216                   159–­161
 group information in, 219–­221       relays used in, 164
 homeostasis in small, closely        for solution of partial
   knit, 222–­223                       differential equations, 6, 161,
 intercommunication in,                 180–­181
   216–­217                           telegraph-­type repeaters,
 social sciences and, 227–­228          168–­169
Computation errors, correction        two great types of, 161
   of, 200                           Conditional probabilities, 96–­97
Computing machines, 7, 8,            Conditioned reflexes in
   19–­21, 34, 39, 56, 61, 85,          computing machines,
   86                                   178–­179
 as analogy machines, 161,           Conductivity, phenomena of,
   165–­166                             25–­26
 brain as, 20–­22, 25, 29,           Conscience, 205
   165–­166, 171                     Control by informative feedback,
 conditioned reflexes in, 178–­179      154–­155
 contingencies affecting             Control systems, 132–­133
   operation of, 163–­164            Conway, Flo, xiv, xvii
 data inserted at beginning in       Cybernetics, or Control and
   ideal, 162–­163                      Communication in the Animal
 defined, 159                           and the Machine
 as essential for the war effort,     on cybernetics as lingua franca
   22–­23                               of animals and machines,
 game-­playing, 228–­230,               xv–­xvi, xxi–­xxii
   234–­239, 241–­242                 first reissue of, ix
 induction by, 172–­173               Greek origin of name Cybernetics
 learning apparatus in, 179–­181        and, 18
 logic of, 173–­174                   moral position of, 41–­42
 mathematical logic and,              preface to second edition of,
   xxiii–­xxiv, 19–­20                  xxxv–­xlvii


===== PDF PAGE 345 =====

296                                                              Index



Dark Hero of the Information Age,   Feedback(s)
   xiv                                affective tone as, 176–­177
Darwin, Charles, 51–­53               anticipatory, 153
Darwin, George, 50, 52                chain of transmission and
Davis, James W., xlvii                  return of information as,
Death effects on the brain, 205         129–­131
De Santillana, G., 35                 compensator and effector,
Descartes, René, 57–­58                 153–­155
Discrete time series, theory of,      complicated system stabilized
   121–­125                             by two, 144–­145
Dubé, Georges, 42                     control by informative, 154–­155
Durchmusterung, 44–­45                differential operators and ranges
Dynamics, 174–­175                      of, 139–­143
                                      double system of control and,
Effective boundary, 137                 146
Electrical currents and circuits,     eye-­muscle, 184–­185
    xxxvi, xxxvii, 29, 246–­247       homeostatic, 156–­157
Electroencephalography, 253–­254      in human animal reflexes,
Electrophysiology, 252–­253             153–­154
Energy                                infinity and, 137–­138
  computing machine, 181–­182         information and, 132–­133
  human, 59–­60, 181–­182             interior points and, 137–­139
Engineering, ancient, 54–­55          mathematics of, 133–­137
Entropy, 80–­83, 88, 90               mechanical systems of,
Ergodic hypothesis, 71, 77–­80          132–­133
Ergodic transformations, 78–­80       negative, 132
Ericsson, M., 27                      oscillations due to excessive
Evolution, Darwinian, 51–­52            amount of, 148
Ex-­Prodigy: My Childhood and         of voluntary activity, 132,
    Youth, xiv, xvii                    146–­147
Exterior points, 137                Feedback systems, information,
                                        xxviii–­xxix
Facebook, xi, xii, xviii            Ferromagnetism, 169–­170
Feedback control, xxx, 11–­12,      Filtering problem, time series,
   152                                  114–­121
 double system of, 146              Fireflies, 275–­276


===== PDF PAGE 346 =====

Index                                                                 297



First-­order programming, 238–­239      Group information, 219–­221
Fisher, R. A., 17                       Group scanning, 189–­191
Fourier transformation, 105–­108,
    115–­119                            Haldane, J. B. S., 34, 128
Fremont-­Smith, Frank, 26–­27           Handedness, 211–­213
Frequency modulation, 255               Harmonic analysis, 34–­35, 254,
Freud, Sigmund, 178                        263, 275
Functional disorders, 202–­203          Harrison, George, 32
                                        Harvard Business Review, x
Gabor, Dennis, xli, xliii–­xliv, 246,   Hayles, N. Katherine, xvi
   248                                  Hearing, sight replaced by,
Game-­playing machines,                    196–­197
   228–­230, 234–­239, 241              Heims, Steve J., xvi, xviii
Games                                   Heisenberg, Werner, 53
 checkers, 238                          Hey, W., 43
 chess, 228–­230, 236–­237              Homeostasis, 156–­157
 magic, 242–­244                         in small, closely knit
 physical contests as, 241–­242            communities, 222–­223
 struggle activities as, 239–­241       Human body, energy of, 59–­60
 war as, 235–­236, 242, 245             Human logic, 173–­174
Game theory, 235–­236                   Hume, David, 174, 183
Gas flow rates, 149–­150                Huxley, Julian, 234
Gauss–­Markov processes, xxvii
Generators, output of, 276–­277         I Am a Mathematician, xv
Gestalt, 27, 33, 37, 191, 194           Ikehara, Shikao, xlvi
Gibbs, Willard, xviii, 53–­54, 70       Induction, 172–­173
 ergodic hypothesis of, 71              Industrial revolutions, 40–­41
 statistical mechanics work of,         Infinity, 137–­138
   65–­67, 70–­71                       Information
 on transformation groups,                amount of, 86–­91, 127–­128
   71–­76                                 chain of transmission and
God, 57–­59                                return of, 129–­131
Goethe, Johann Wolfgang von,              and communication as
   xix, 243                                mechanisms of organization,
Google, xviii                              27–­28
Greed, xiii                               conveyed in odors, 217


===== PDF PAGE 347 =====

298                                                               Index



Information (cont.)                   Lettvin, J., 21, 178
  group, 219–­221                     Lewin, Kurt, 27
  statistical theory of amount of,    Lies, 221–­222
    16–­17                            Limbs, artificial, 38
  storage of, 166–­171                Lindsley, Donald B., 272
  various forms of communication      Linear control system design,
    of, 217–­219                         xxvii–­xxix
  Wiener’s definition of, xxiv–­xxv   Linear invariants, 74, 77
Information feedback, xxviii–­xxix    Linear operations, 238–­239
Intercommunication in                 Linear prediction, theory of,
    organizations, 216–­217              xliii–­xliv
Interior points, 137–­139             Lobotomy, 205–­206
Internal noise of receiving system,   Locke, John, 174, 175, 183, 187,
    119                                  188
Invariants of the group, 74           Logic, human, 173–­174
Ito, xxvi                             Lorente de Nó, Rafael, 23


Jacobs, W. W., xix, 243               MacColl, L. A., 12, 144
                                      Machina ratiocinatrix, 19
Kalman, R. E., xxvii                  Magic, 57, 242–­244
Kalman–­Bucy filter, xxvii            Magnetic tape, 254–­255
Kipling, Rudyard, xviii, 239–­240     Markov processes, theory of,
Koopman, 77, 79                          xxvi
Kotelly, John C., xlvii               Mathematical logic, xxiii–­xxiv,
                                         19–­21
Learning machines, xlii–­xlv,         Maxwell demons, xxix–­xxx, 17,
   179–­181                              81–­83
 games and, 228–­245                  McAfee, Andrew, x
 magic and, 242–­244                  McCulloch, Warren, 18, 20–­21,
Lebesgue, Henri, 65, 69                  23, 27, 33, 37–­38, 193, 194
 work on theory of trigonometric      Mead, Margaret, 28, 36
   series, 67–­68                     Measurement precision, 86–­87
Lee, Kai-­Fu, x                       Mechanical feedback, 132–­133
Lee, Yuk Wing, xlvi, 6, 24            Memory, 166–­170
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 4, 19,     functional and organic disorders
   58–­59, 215                           and, 202–­203


===== PDF PAGE 348 =====

Index                                                                299



 loss of, 203–­204                    synapses in, 20–­22, 25, 29,
 sensory prosthesis and, 195–­196       165–­166, 171, 179, 271–­272
Message–­noise problem, 93–­94        tabes dorsalis of, 13, 129–­130
Messages, theory of, 120              treatment of discrepancies by,
Meteorology, 44–­47                     201–­202
 cosmic, 50                           vision and (See Vision)
 tidal evolution and, 50–­52         Neurons, 165–­166
Metrically transitive                 lengths of chains of, 209–­210
   transformations, 78–­79            memory loss and, 203–­204
Michelson interferometer,            Newtonian mechanics, 53–­54
   257–­258                           in astronomy, 45–­50
Mind, content of the human, 174      New York Times, ix, xii
Minimization problems, 15            Nikodym, theorem of, 96
Momentum, 126                        Noisy-­channel coding theorem,
Moral position of Wiener on             xxiii
   science, xvi–­xvii, 41–­42        Non-­linear prediction, xliii–­xliv
Multiple time series, 97–­98         Nonlinear Problems in Random
Muscle action, 12–­13, 25               Theory, xxxvii–­xxxix, 247
 artificial limbs and, 38            Non-­linear systems, xxxii–­xxxiii,
 feedback and, 146–­147                 xxxvi–­xli, 239
Mutual information, xxii              oscillations of frequencies in,
                                        273–­274
Negative feedbacks, 132              Non-­linear systems of relaxation
Nervous system. See also Brain          oscillations, 150–­151
 affective tone and, 175–­177, 207   Non-­linear transducers, 246–­249
 artificial intelligence and, xvi,   Northrup, F. C. S., 28
   xxxiii–­xxxiv                     Numerical machines, 161–­162,
 ataxia of, 12–­13, 129–­130            194
 chain of transmission and
   return of information in,         “On Computable Numbers,
   129–­131                             with an Application to the
 limits to organization of, 207         Entscheidungsproblem,” xxi
 mathematical logic and, 20–­22      Ontogenetic learning, 233–­234
 memory and, 166–­170                Organic disorders, 202–­203
 messages to, 177–­178               Organisms, multicellular, 215–­216
 neurons in, 165–­166                Organizations. See Communities


===== PDF PAGE 349 =====

300                                                                   Index



Organ pipes, 148–­149                   Probabilities, conditional, 96–­97
Oscillation, 29, 30–­31                 Probability, a priori versus a
 of frequencies in non-­linear             posteriori, 86–­87
   mechanisms, 273–­274                 Probability density, 90–­93
 mathematics symbolism of,              Probability zero, 66–­67, 96
   133–­137                             Proofs, logical, 173
 non-­sinusoidal, 148                   Psychology, 171–­172
 in organ pipes, 148–­149               Psychopathology
 relaxation, 149–­150                    commonalities between
Osgood, W. F., 70                          the brain and computing
Outline drawing recognition,               machines and, 199–­200
   186–­187                              distinction between functional
                                           and organic disorders in,
Paleontology, 51–­52                       202–­203
Parkinsonism, 146                        traffic jams and, 207–­209
Partial differential equations, 6,      Ptolemaic geocentric system,
    161, 180–­181                          xxxvii
Pascal, Blaise, 19                      Purpose tremor, 13, 146
Pavlov, Ivan, 175
Pfeiffer, John, ix                      Quantum degeneracy, 170
Phase average, 95–­96                   Quantum mechanics, 125–­126
Phosphorescence, 170
Photocells, 193                         Raisbeck, Gordon, xlvi
Photography, 169, 170, 187              Ramos, F. Garcia, 26
Phylogenetic learning, 233–­234,        Random noise, xxxix–­xl
    251                                 Reading by blind persons, 33,
Physical contests as games,                191–­192
    241–­242                            Reflexes, feedback in, 153–­154
Pitts, Walter, 20–­21, 23, 26, 33, 42   Relaxation oscillation, 149–­150
Planck’s law, 53                         non-­linear systems of, 150–­151
Prediction                              Robinson, Charles E., xlvii
  linear and non-­linear, xliii–­xliv   Rosenblith, Walter A., 255, 274
  time series problem, 110–­114,        Rosenblueth, Arturo, 3, 4–­6, 8,
    120                                    13–­14, 17–­19, 23, 25–­26, 31
Prefrontal lobotomy, 205                Royce, Josiah, 4
Principle of Uncertainty, xviii, 15     Russell, Bertrand, 173


===== PDF PAGE 350 =====

Index                                                                301



Salivation, 175                       Sleep, 205
Samuel, A. L., xliv                   Smell, sense of, 217
Sandberg, Henrik, xxx                 Social sciences, 227–­228
Scanning process, 7, 168–­169,        Social systems, communication
    189–­190                              within, 35–­36
Science, xii                          Sociology, 27–­28
Scientific fields, Wiener on          Statistical mechanics, xxix–­xxxii
    boundaries of, 4–­6                 character groups in, 75–­76
Scientific judgment, 36–­37             entropy and, 80–­83
Second law of thermodynamics,           Gibbs’ work on, 65–­67
    xxxii                               Lebegue’s work on trigonometric
Second-­order programming,                series and, 67–­68, 69
    238–­239                            Maxwel demons in, 81–­83
Self-­organization of brain waves,      time average in, 70
    251, 277–­279                       transformation groups in, 71–­76
Self-­organization of genes, xlii,    Steam engines, 56
    xlvi                              Stock market, xii–­xiii, 228
Self-­propagating machines            Storage of information, 166–­171
  defined, 245–­246                   Struggle activities as games,
  electrical currents and, 246–­247       239–­241
  non-­linear transducers and,        Symbolism of mathematics,
    246–­249                              133–­137
  shot-­effect inputs and, 247–­248   Synapses, 20–­22, 25, 29, 165–­166,
Selfridge, Oliver G., 26, 42, 178         171, 179
Senses, human. See Smell, sense         nerve fibers carrying, 271–­272
    of; Vision                        Szent-­Györgyi, Albert, 128
Sensory prosthesis, 191, 195–­196
Servomechanisms, 29                   Tabes dorsalis, 13, 129–­130
Shannon, Claude, xv–­xvi, xxi,        Taylor, G. I., 254
    xxii–­xxiii, 17, 20–­21, 119      Telegraph-­type repeaters, 168, 187
Shockley, William, xxi                Telephone circuits, 85–­86, 94,
Shock treatment, 205–­206                208
Shot-­effect inputs, 247–­248         Tesla, xii
Siegelman, Jim, xiv, xvii             The Computer and the Brain, xxi
Similarity, theory of, 183, 187       The Human Use of Human Beings,
Skyscrapers, 207–­208                    xiii, xvii, xxxvi, 243


===== PDF PAGE 351 =====

302                                                                 Index



“The Sorcerer’s Apprentice,” xix,    concentration of visual
    243                                information in, 185–­186
Tidal evolution, 50–­53              eye-­muscle feedbacks in,
Time, 47–­48, 54                       184–­185
Time average, 70                     group scanning in, 189–­191
Time series                          outline drawing recognition
  applications of, 85–­86              and, 186–­187
  Brownian motion, 98–­105, 120      reading by persons without, 33,
  conditional probabilities and,       191–­192
    96–­97                           replaced by hearing, 196–­197
  defined, 94–­95                    sensory prosthesis and, 191,
  filtering problem, 114–­121          195–­196
  Fourier transformation,            stages in diagrammatization of
    105–­108, 115–­119                 impressions in, 187–­188
  multiple, 97–­98                   transformations in, 188–­189
  prediction problem for,           Visual flicker, 273
    110–­114, 120                   Vitalism, 54, 63
  theory of amount of               Vocoder system, 85–­86, 94
    information and, 127–­128       Volta and Galvani, 252
  theory of discrete, 121–­125      Voluntary activity, 12–­13
  zeros in, 109–­110                 feedback of, 132, 146–­147
Traffic jams, 207–­209              Von Neumann, John, xxi, 28, 77,
Transformation groups, 71–­76          79, 180, 220–­221, 245
  visual perspective, 188–­191       game theory of, 235–­236
Transformations, ergodic, 78–­80
Trigonometric functions,            Wallace, Alfred, 52
    xxxvii–­xxxix, 65               War as game, 235–­236, 242,
  Lebesgue’s work on, 67–­68           245
Trump, Donald, xix                  Watanabe, S., xliv, 239
Tube noise, 247                     Wave problems, 23–­24
Turing, Alan, xxi, 34, 173          Weaver, Warren, 23
                                    Webster, Frederic, 42
Uber, xii                           Wiener, Leo, xiv
                                    Wiener, Norbert
Vallarta, Manuel Sandoval, 4, 25     as child prodigy, xiv–­xv
Vision                               collaborators with, xv, 3–­8


===== PDF PAGE 352 =====

Index                                 303



 contributions to mathematics
   by, xxiii–­xxiv, 19–­21
 depression experienced by,
   xvii–­xviii
 design of linear control system
   and, xxvii–­xxix
 on greed, xiii
 information defined by,
   xxiv–­xxv
 introduction by, x
 on mass media of his day, xi
 non-­linear systems and,
   xxxii–­xxxiii, xxxvi–­xxxvii
 overt warnings about
   technology, xi, xviii
 prophecy of, through
   Cybernetics, ix–­xi
 recognition of uncertainty, xviii,
   15
 stances against science taken by,
   xvi–­xvii
 statistical mechanics and,
   xxix–­xxxii
Wiener filtering, xxv–­xxvii
Wiener–­Hopf equation, xxvi, 239
Wiener measure, xxiii–­xxiv
World War III, 242


YouTube, xviii


Zuckerberg, Mark, xi


